 trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring colophon reference national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings . human trafficking ten years of independent monitoring. the hague bnrm bureau of the dutch national rapporteur p.o.box eh the hague www.bnrm.nl production and layout het vlakke land rotterdam bnrm content overview of figures and tables foreword the office of national rapporteur . introduction . interviews . a look into the future recommendations and developments . introduction . legislation . international developments . victims . immigration law . supervision enforcement and investigation in the sex industry . training awareness and identification . prosecution and trial data collection and statistical trends . introduction . data collection . victims . suspects and offenders the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the netherlands ten years on bibliography appendix a article f of the dutch criminal code non official translation i article f of the dutch criminal code valid until july i i article f of the dutch criminal code valid from july a explanatory notes to figures tables and statistics a additional tables supplement to . . victims in the comensha register supplement to . . victims and the b regulation supplement to . . victims and compensation supplement to . . suspects and offenders prosecution supplement to . . suspects and offenders trial in first instance supplement to . . suspects and offenders trial on appeal supplement to . . suspects and offenders characteristics a list of activities of bnrm in interviews meetings and working visits netherlands congresses symposia study days and lectures netherlands international working visits congresses and other activities overview of figures and tables figure . number of reported victims figure . gender of reported victims figure . age of reported victims table . ranking of the top nationalities of reported victims figure . trend in the overall top nationalities of reported victims table . ranking of top nationalities of reported underage victims figure . proportion of underage victims among dutch nigerian and other non dutch re ported victims figure . sectors in which victims were exploited figure . a notifiers figure . b notifiers figure . purpose of notification registration nd shelter figure . number of b applications figure . number of b awards figure . gender of victims granted b status figure . age of victims granted b status table . ranking of top nationalities of victims granted b status figure . trend in the overall top nationalities of victims granted b status figure . region of origin of victims granted b status figure . a police regions from which successful b applications were made figure . b police regions from which successful b applications were made figure . number of compensation orders made figure . compensation orders by amount awarded figure . compensation orders by disposition total from figure . compensation orders by amount paid total from table . overview of data on victims figure . number of cases registered by the pps figure . registered cases involving underage victims figure . registered cases by court district total from figure . nature of the registered cases figure . registered cases by most serious offence figure . registered cases and preventive custody figure . number of cases dealt with by the pps figure . cases dealt with by the pps by disposition figure . number of cases dealt with in first instance trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring figure . cases dealt with in first instance by disposition figure . nature of the convictions in first instance figure . convictions by sentence imposed figure . custodial sentences by length of sentence figure . cases dealt with in first instance in which an appeal was filed figure . number of cases dealt with on appeal figure . cases dealt with on appeal by disposition and figure . convictions on appeal by sentence imposed and figure . custodial sentences imposed on appeal by length of sentence and figure . number of suspects registered by the pps figure . number of persons convicted in first instance figure . gender of suspects figure . gender of convicted offenders figure . age of suspects figure . age of convicted offenders table . ranking of top five countries of birth of suspects figure . trend in the overall top countries of birth of suspects table . ranking of top countries of birth of convicted offenders figure . trend in overall top countries of birth of convicted offenders table . overview of data on suspects and offenders foreword this report marks the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the post of national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings as an independent monitoring mechanism of the netherlands efforts to combat human trafficking. it also marks ten years of making recommendations in all. many of those recommendations have been acted upon the importance of some has receded and others have been regularly repeated. this report outlines the progress made in efforts to tackle human trafficking in the netherlands over the last ten years in light of those recommendations. this report contains no new recommendations. nevertheless the contents clearly illustrate the aspects of the fight against human trafficking that still give cause for concern and demand vigilance. new de velopments are highlighted that might present a different kind of challenge in the efforts to combat human trafficking. political and public attention for the subject of human trafficking has grown in the last ten years. tack ling human trafficking is a priority for the police and the public prosecution service. the growing public and political awareness of human trafficking has also increased the abhorrence of this abject form of crime. the political outrage is reflected in the decision to raise the maximum sentences for this serious offence with effect from july . at the same time the statistics show that the number of criminal cases registered by the district offices of the public prosecution service has fluctuated over the years and that in the figure was lower than in . the statistics also show that the proportion of custodial sentences of less than one year is increa sing while prison sentences of more than four years are declining both in first instance and on appeal. any self respecting society should do everything in its power to ensure that the five ps prevention pro tection prosecution punishment and partnership which together form the cornerstone of efforts to combat human trafficking are a constant and integral facet of anti trafficking policies and their implementation in practice. that was also the message conveyed by the european court of human rights in its judgment in the case of rantsev versus cyprus and russia. effective progress depends on cooperation between the various actors responsible for implementing the p paradigm. enormous efforts have also been made in this respect in recent years. but cooperation in the anti trafficking chain is not in itself a magic formula. success demands a constant willingness on the part of every actor to help find solutions for those elements of the paradigm that are not necessarily their own direct responsibility. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring human trafficking is a worldwide problem. although roughly a quarter of the registered victims in the last ten years were dutch the majority are still people who have fled from poverty in their own country in search of a more dignified existence only to end up being exploited in the sex industry or in other sectors. their experience is vividly illustrated by journey an exhibition that bnrm is bringing to the nether lands to mark its tenth anniversary. the exhibition tells the story of a young east european girl who was trafficked for the purpose of exploitation in prostitution in the united kingdom. the exhibition makes a deep impression and provides inspiration for continuing the fight against human trafficking. for the last ten years the rapporteur has held a mirror up to the agencies engaged in the fight against human trafficking in the netherlands. they have looked in that mirror. various agencies and individuals helped in the production of this report. i am very grateful to comensha the ind and the cjib for their assistance and for the data they provided. i would also like to thank the wodc siba for its analysis of the public prosecution service s data. as always the staff of bnrm has displayed the inspiration they draw from the subject of human traf ficking. i would also like to thank them. c.e.dettmeijer vermeulen national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings the office of national rapporteur . introduction the basis for the appointment of a national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the nether lands was laid by the the hague declaration which was adopted in following a ministerial confe rence on trafficking in women organised by the european union eu . one of the recommendations made in this declaration was that member states should appoint national rapporteurs to report to their governments on the scale prevention and combating of trafficking in women. national rapporteurs were also encouraged to promote mutual cooperation on a regular basis. this description of the tasks of national rapporteurs remains valid to this day. the european council s conclusions on the establishment of an informal network of national rapporteurs on trafficking in human beings or similar mechanisms in also illustrates the need for objective reliable comparable and up to date strategic informa tion about human trafficking in the eu.nrm in these documents the scope of the offence is no longer confined to trafficking in women but extends to trafficking in human beings. the nature of the mandate requires that the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings must be independent. the rapporteur submits annual reports to the minister of justice. the government responds to the reports and informs parliament of its conclusions. through these reports the rappor teur plays an important role in monitoring policies to combat human trafficking and the associated legislation. the government generally publishes a reaction to substantive reports by the rapporteur which is then the subject of a plenary debate in the lower house of parliament. the fight against human trafficking is a topic that is also regularly addressed in the election manifestos of many of the political parties. this chapter discusses the steps taken to monitor and report on efforts to combat human trafficking. after a brief review of a report that can be regarded as an early precursor of the reports of today s rapporteur there is a brief discussion of the terms of reference of the rapporteur and of equiva lent mechanisms in other countries. the following sections contain interviews with three different rapporteurs the current un special rapporteur on trafficking in persons the first national rapporteur in the hague ministerial declaration on european guidelines for effective measures to prevent and combat trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation. ibidem iii. . . see also nrm chapter . council conclusions on establishing an informal eu network of national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms on traf ficking in human beings th meeting luxembourg june . see the interviews in . . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring the netherlands and finland s first national rapporteur. the chapter concludes with a glimpse into the future including a consideration of the recent expansion of the tasks of the rapporteur in the netherlands. . . a brief history as early as the beginning of the th century research into the nature and scale of human trafficking was conducted in the netherlands. in j. balkestein a police inspector in haarlem went undercover in the world of prostitution in an attempt to unravel the practices of traffickers in women. the report of that investigation can be regarded as an early precursor of the reports of today s rapporteur. the author of the report made a number of recommendations on the basis of his investigation. one noteworthy recommendation was that the government should continue conducting research into the nature and scale of human trafficking. in the national office for the collection of data concerning so called traffic in women and girls was established. this office can also be regarded as an early precursor of the office of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings bnrm . the author s recommendations concerning the treatment of victims and his analysis of the methods used at that time to induce women to prostitute themselves remain valid to this day. the following text box contains a passage from the concluding section of the report in . report of an investigation into trafficking in women your assignment to me read conduct a study into the nature and scale of the trafficking in women and girls in this country. your committee suspected that such trafficking existed and wished to know to what extent it could be combated. i feel that careful consideration of my report will show that it has provided important building blocks for answering the latter question. nevertheless because of my investigation i am perhaps better placed than anyone to judge how necessary it is for such work to continue and in that context feel justified in making the following comments in view of the possibility that either the government or private parties will later conduct similar investigations again. if a study is to be complete it is not enough for the police to confine themselves to providing information they will have to provide their direct cooperation which they undoubtedly would have done if the investigation had been commissioned by the government. experience has taught me that the best method of investigation is to question the prostitutes. in that context the main priority for the researcher is not to learn how the interviewees feel about their own lives but only how they have become who they are. there are two ways of doing this both of which must be followed. questioning the women themselves and verifying what they have said. for the first the questioning of the women them selves the two main requirements are that the women are questioned as far as possible beyond the influence of the brothel owner or madam and that the interviewer possesses the maximum possible knowledge of human nature and experience so that he is able to form something of an balkestein . for more background information on the production of this report and the measures taken in response to the recommendations see blekendaal . royal decree of march bulletin of acts order and decrees no. . for a description of the history of the establishment of the post of rapporteur see nrm chapter . balkestein . the office of national rapporteur impression of what the woman before him was like before she entered prostitution and finally that he is able to win the trust of the woman. it will be impossible to gain a satisfactory answer to the question of whether violence or decep tion on the part of traffickers is an important element in women and girls becoming prostitutes if one persists in searching for the very few cases where entirely innocent girls or women are brought into prostitution by acts of open violence or deception entirely against their will and without their prior knowledge. what one should search for is the following are a series of acts of indirect compulsion and deception committed by a large number of persons acting in concert against women and girls whose lives may not be unimpeachable but who without these acts of indirect compulsion and deception would still never have accepted the life of a prostitute as i have par tially described it above and has been explored for the first time by me although i acknowledge that this question has been posed in such a way that it must already influence the answer i am still firmly convinced that only by proceeding in the direction i suggest is an investigation likely to bear fruit and lead to the answer to the question of how this indirect coercion and deception can be tackled. . . terms of reference of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings the task of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings is report annually on the nature and scale of human trafficking the mechanisms that play a role in human trafficking the developments taking place in this field and the effects of relevant policy. the rapporteur has no executive tasks at operational level. the rapporteur is assisted by the staff of the office of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings which gathers quantitative and qualitative information through its own research through se condary analysis of existing databases and by organising meetings and attending regular consultations. bnrm is also represented on review committees for studies into subjects relating to human trafficking and associated topics. the rapporteur also participates in international forums such as steering groups and roundtable meetings on eu policy to combat human trafficking. it is difficult to measure the scale of human trafficking. the rapporteur has repeatedly referred in re ports to how important it is for the responsible agencies to keep proper records so that quantitative data can be collected about human trafficking and the efforts to address it. better registration and improved methods of registration of victims also remain important areas of concern at the interna tional level. such quantitative records can however give a distorted view of reality.nrm qualitative research is therefore also important for a deeper insight into human trafficking. this is reflected for the most recent appointment is laid down in the regulation of october no. on the appointment of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings regulation on the ap pointment of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings government gazette . one of these was the second evaluation of the lifting of the ban on brothels. for a list of other review committees of which bnrm is a member see the lists of activities in the reports and appendix . nrm recommendation nrm recommendation nrm recommendations and nrm recommendations to . for example see kutnick et al. . this publication used data from the dutch rapporteur and des cribed various methods of registration relating to human trafficking. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring example in the recommendations to find out more about what happens to victims after they have been recognised as such. other recommendations in the last years have concerned the desirability of research into other sub jects such as the disappearance of victims from shelters and the reasons for it as well as the experiences of victims after they have returned to their country of origin. the rapporteur has also referred to the importance of thoroughly investigating whether prostitutes who work legally are victims of human traf ficking. if research that has been recommended has not been carried out the rapporteur may decide to conduct the research personally especially if the subject is urgent. the first report was primarily a survey of the state of affairs with respect to human trafficking and the efforts being made to tackle it at that time which was shortly after the abolition of the general ban on brothels. bnrm has carried out more research of its own for many of the subsequent reports. one of the studies involved an exploration of the existence of exploitation outside the sex industry other forms of exploitation following the entry into force in of the new article of the criminal code on human trafficking. the results of that study appeared in the fifth report which also published the findings of a study into financial investigations. for the most recent report bnrm conducted studies into the ap plication of the non punishment principle cases that have been shelved by the police and objections to decisions not to prosecute article of the code of criminal procedure and the case law on human trafficking in the sex industry. because good research is extremely important for combating human trafficking effectively the growing academic interest in the subject of human trafficking is a welcome development. . . national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms in other countries various international bodies including the united nations un have urged countries to appoint rap porteurs. the explanatory report to the council of europe s convention on action against trafficking in human beings which also calls for the appointment of national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms expressly mentions the dutch national rapporteur as an example of an independent monitoring mechanism. following the european commission s evaluation of the eu action plan on human trafficking in one of the principal recommendations made by the commission was to establish national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms. the commission said these national agencies should be given the task of monitoring trends in human trafficking as well as the results of policies and measures to combat human trafficking. the council of ministers of the european union adopted conclusions on the subject nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . for example the un general assembly in resolution a res of february recommended the appointment of national rapporteurs. a report on the uk by anti slavery international stated that an independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings should be established in the uk along the lines of the role of the dutch national rapporteur anti slavery international p. . the convention calls on states parties to consider appointing a national rapporteur or equivalent me chanism for monitoring the anti trafficking activities of state institutions and the implementation of national legislation requirements article of the council of europe convention on action against trafficking in human beings bulletin of treaties . the hague declaration of also called for the appointment of national rapporteurs. see . . the office of national rapporteur in june .nrm there is now an informal network of national rapporteurs which is an important step since national rapporteurs can promote the exchange of best practices and share experiences at national and european level. the network has held two meetings so far. there are not yet many other countries with an independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings. in practice a growing number of countries have established an equivalent mechanism which is usually integrated in a ministry or the police force. a number of countries have appointed a coordinator in addition to a national rapporteur or equivalent mechanism.nrm in some cases the same agency performs the role of coordinator and of national rap porteur or equivalent mechanism . coordination the purpose of coordinating mechanisms is to match policies with measures taken to combat human trafficking. for example the council of europe s convention on action against trafficking in human beings provides that the parties must take steps to coordinate the policies and measures of ministries and other public bodies responsible for combating human trafficking. where appro priate they should establish special bodies for that purpose. the action plan of the organisation for security and cooperation in europe osce refers to the appointment of national coordinators as an element of national referral mechanisms. this means that every member state must create an instrument for providing help and protection to victims. the national referral mechanism is assigned a referring and coordinating task in the activities of the part ners in the anti trafficking chain. according to the osce action plan it should create a framework that both enables the member state to meet its obligations towards victims and provide a mecha nism in which civil society organisations and the relevant government institutions can cooperate. in its annual report for the osce published an evaluation of the progress made in drafting na tional action plans and establishing national coordination structures and reporting mecha nisms. although there was variation in the structures of national coordination mechanisms at least of the member states and partner countries had such a mechanism. slightly less than of the member states and partner countries said that they have a national rapporteur or equivalent mechanism while almost of the states reported that they did not. in the netherlands the ministry of justice coordinates the formulation of policy. the task force on hu man trafficking also plays a coordinating role in the sense of providing a platform where the partners responsible for preventing and combating human trafficking can meet to identify areas where efforts are falling short and eliminate problems by removing practical obstacles. the members of the task force represent the entire spectrum from prevention to prosecution and improving the position of victims. the most recent meeting was held in brussels on june . finland has an independent rapporteur. in belgium a reporting mechanism very similar to that of the netherlands is the centre for equal opportunities and opposition to racism which also reports annually on measures to combat human trafficking. as far as referrals in relation to victims are concerned comensha until the end of the stichting tegen vrouwenhandel stv is the central body in the netherlands for the notification placement and registration of victims of human trafficking see . . . nrm pp. et seq. decision establishing the task force government gazette .. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring . interviews this section contains interviews with three different rapporteurs the un special rapporteur on traf ficking in persons the first independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the netherlands and finland s first national rapporteur. finland was the latest country to appoint an inde pendent national rapporteur. . . joy ngozi ezeilo un special rapporteur on trafficking in persons joy ezeilo the current un special rapporteur on trafficking in persons especially women and children is the second person to occupy that position. the task of the rapporteur is to focus on the human rights of victims of human trafficking and to report each year to the commission as well as making recommendations on measures that might be required to protect the human rights of victims. the rapporteur also receives individual complaints of violations of human rights of victims and undertakes working visits to countries in order to make recommendations for improvements in the prevention of human trafficking and in measures to address it and for improvements in the protection of the human rights of victims.nrm because the un special rapporteur also has an important role in monitoring international policy on human trafficking this interview with her is very relevant to this chapter on the work of rapporteurs. appointment of the un special rapporteur on trafficking in persons i was appointed as un special rapporteur on trafficking in persons especially women and children in june . my term of office commenced in august of that year and runs until . i was appointed by the un human rights council. when i heard of my nomination i had no reservations about accepting the position. of course i realised that the position would carry enormous responsibility and significant obligations. it was however an opportunity for me and a privilege to lead this process at a global level and to be able to report to the general assembly in new york. challenges as un special rapporteur as rapporteur i see a number of challenges in the fight against human trafficking. the first major challenge is to gather reliable statistics on human trafficking. there are conflicting estimates of the scale of human trafficking from different organisations and countries. it is therefore very difficult to be certain about the scale of the problem which underlines the need for the systematic and coordinated collection and management of data. the lack of reliable data makes it difficult to ascertain whether the number of victims of human trafficking is rising or falling. take the economic crisis for example. there may be more victims of human trafficking at the moment because of the crisis but the difficulty of acquiring reliable statistics complicates efforts to generate reliable data on the possible effects of the crisis. prosecuting human trafficking is also difficult. human trafficking is a criminal activity it is dynamic and the methods employed by human traffickers are constantly changing. those factors make prosecuting human traffickers a complex business. in many countries it is difficult to gather evidence. it is therefore important for countries to share information. human trafficking has been made a criminal offence in most countries but the definition of the offence is not always equally comprehensive. in many countries although sexual exploitation of women and children has been criminalised other forms of exploitation or trafficking of men have not. furthermore joy ngozi ezeilo was interviewed by telephone on may . the decision to appoint the un special rapporteur was made by the un human rights commission in april un doc. e cn. l. . the office of national rapporteur in some countries human trafficking has been criminalised under the definition of another offence such as kidnapping. that is ineffective and i would like to see specific national legislation for every form of human trafficking. effective coordination of efforts to combat human trafficking is still a problem. countries should have national rapporteurs who can act as coordinators. these rapporteurs should have statutory powers to address human trafficking. countries should also have a national action plan containing specific mea sures designed to combat human trafficking. national action plans and national rapporteurs on human trafficking help us to monitor and evaluate policy. they can also provide statistics that can be used to measure the effectiveness of steps taken to prevent human trafficking to prosecute suspects and to protect victims. vulnerable groups of victims child victims of human trafficking are particularly vulnerable. they need a different form of interven tion than adult victims but at the moment there is no specific approach tailored to the needs of young victims of human trafficking. the same applies for male victims such as victims of exploitation outside the sex industry. many countries have no shelters for male victims. this is an aspect that we need to focus on. i am also concerned about the forced surrender of organs. we know that this is a growing pheno menon which is why it is important for more action to be taken in this area starting with the creation of the correct legal framework. five ps three rs and three cs in addressing human trafficking i focus on the five ps three rs and three cs. let me explain what the letters stand for. five ps the five ps stand for protection of victims prosecution punishment prevention and promotion of international cooperation. in my view prevention must be at the heart of efforts to combat human trafficking. we do not do enough in terms of prevention tending instead to focus mainly on the problems. however people need information and advice about human trafficking particularly vulnerable groups. that is the key to preventing human trafficking. the fifth p promotion of international cooperation is also very important. human trafficking does not recognise borders. it affects every country in the world countries of origin countries of transit and countries of destination. we have to cooperate we have to share information. three rs the three rs stand for redress rehabilitation and reintegration. redress is very important for vic tims who must for example be compensated for loss of income and for the harm caused to them. this compensation must be recovered from the human trafficker. we need to be mindful of rehabilitation since that helps us to understand the practical needs of victims such as access to medical care medical facilities and adequate shelter. as far as the reintegration of victims is concerned cooperation between countries and organisation is important. when a victim returns to his or her country of origin cooperation with the authorities and with organisations in that country are essential for the victim s successful reintegration. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring three cs the three cs highlight the need for capacity coordination and cooperation. these elements are needed to address human trafficking effectively. coordination is essential for the correct identifi cation of victims. in practice it can be difficult to make a distinction between illegal migrants and victims of human trafficking. the procedure for identifying victims should be the same everywhere. that calls for coordination and cooperation. furthermore agencies involved in the identification of victims such as the police the immigration service and the labour inspectorate require specific training. sharing best practices i share best practices in one country that increase the effectiveness of anti trafficking efforts with other countries. i do not want to stigmatise any countries. in my view it is important to visit countries with a good record so that i can learn from these good examples and share them with other countries. this interaction can make a difference. my reports are a way of sharing information. victim centred approach it is very important not to address human trafficking only on the basis of criminal law. from my years of experience as a pro bono lawyer for women and other vulnerable groups a victim centred approach to human trafficking is very important to me. i place a lot of emphasis on victims in my position as un special rapporteur. my first report which focused specifically on victims was well received. linking the causes of human trafficking to the millennium development goals i try to link the causes of human trafficking to the millennium development goals mdgs . for example the first millennium development goal eradicating poverty and hunger is closely related to human trafficking since poverty is a root cause of human trafficking. poverty makes people vul nerable and that increases the risk that they will be exploited. the third millennium development goal on gender equality is also linked to human trafficking because gender inequality is a cause of human trafficking. by linking the mdgs to human trafficking countries have become more aware of the causes of human trafficking. because states have accepted obligations based on the mdgs they can be held accountable if they fail to meet them. the importance of a rapporteur as un special rapporteur i am able to devote special attention to human trafficking. the un human rights council cannot do everything it would like to do in the field of human rights. the appointment of a special rapporteur on trafficking in persons means that specific attention can be devoted to the subject of human trafficking. my strength as un special rapporteur is that i can report on human trafficking and call on countries to undertake action. i can also mobilise all the chain partners and work with them. it is important for the rapporteur to be a representative of the government. the rapporteur must not be influenced and must be entirely independent. you could say the un special rapporteur is placed above the system in order to guarantee her independence. the office of national rapporteur . . anna korvinus first national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the netherlands anna korvinus was the first national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the netherlands making her the first independent rapporteur in the world. she held the position from april to october . her reflections on that period provide interesting insights into how human trafficking was viewed at that time and give an idea of the challenges she faced as the first national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and the results she achieved. appointment as the first independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings i was appointed as rapporteur on april . one of the recommendations made by an eu ministerial conference on trafficking in women in was that countries should appoint national rapporteurs. the intention was that they would provide governments with adequate and reliable information and with objective advice. the rapporteur therefore had to be independent. in the netherlands had not yet acted on this recommendation but the process of implementing the recommendation really took off after the d political party had submitted questions to the minister of justice. my appointment as rapporteur on april was arranged by minister of justice korthals who was the minister responsible for coordinating government policy on human trafficking. the office of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings commenced operations on september of that year. trafficking in human beings or trafficking in women an important issue for me before deciding whether to accept the appointment as rapporteur was that the scope of my tasks and powers and particularly the fields of research had to be clear. in the commu nication with the lower house of parliament the article of the criminal code that had even then long been known as the human trafficking article was used as a reference. the ministerial conference in which recommended that countries should appoint a national rapporteur was mainly concerned with trafficking in women and children. moreover the negotiations in vienna on the conclusion of the un convention for the suppression of transnational organised crime and the associated protocol which relates to and refers to human trafficking were already at an advanced stage. this legislation which the states parties to the convention had to follow in amending national legislation was not confined to women but refers to persons. i therefore felt it was logical that i should be appointed as the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings. the minister agreed with me and informed the lower house of parliament that a national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings would be ap pointed referring to article a of the dutch criminal code. although in practice this article applied mainly to women in prostitution in the case of minors it could apply to both boys and girls. it was also anticipated that the article of dutch law would be extended to conform with the internationally agreed definition. there was i learned later initially some criticism in feminist circles that the new rapporteur would focus on human trafficking and not specifically on trafficking in women. they wanted the emphasis to be on women as victims but in view of developments and from an international perspective it was simply better and more orderly particularly in terms of research and to avoid confusion of terminology to define the area of concern as trafficking in human beings . the interview was held on april . ms korvinus valedictory address on september was also incorporated in the interview. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring human trafficking as an issue of public morals one aspect of my function as rapporteur that was difficult in the beginning was that the institution was not known. at first it was still only associated with prostitution. people regarded the subject of human trafficking in very narrow terms. it was treated a little disparagingly. victims were seen as women who had brought it on themselves to a certain extent. there was a lot of prejudice. it was also felt to be purely a public morals issue in the sense of a departure from good moral standards. people felt it was exaggerated to appoint a rapporteur specifically for this subject. the perception was lacking that human trafficking was connected with organised crime and often transnational crime and was a highly profitable branch of crime. the public prosecution service treated human trafficking as an offence against public morals. when i wanted to discuss the subject of human trafficking with the council of procurators general one of them said which portfolio does human trafficking fall under public morals or organised crime i replied both. i felt it was important for human trafficking to be addressed not only as a public morals issue but also in the context of the fight against organised crime. when it was solely a matter for the vice squad cases of human trafficking were usually only discovered by chance. after all there was already a policy of tolerance towards operators in the prostitution business at that time and the police were not actively looking for human trafficking. from time to time they might discover a victim of human trafficking. this was also partly due to the fact that the vice teams were small and had few resources. they did not have sufficient manpower to address human trafficking on a structural basis. from the perspective of victim support this view was initially seen as a deterioration of the situation for victims so i had to operate delicately. victims should be helped but repression is also needed if you want a structural solution. women are victims men are offenders in november i attended a un meeting on human trafficking outside new york. during the meeting i remarked that men could also be victims and that women could be perpetrators. at first everyone attacked me for saying this since surely women could not be perpetrators. they actually found it shocking. i was initially regarded suspiciously for this remark but was later proved right. human rights one of the most important challenges was to have human trafficking seen in the context of a violation of human rights. i repeatedly pointed out that even with enforcement under criminal law the key was protection of human rights and that it could not be regarded as a government activity separate from that. the argument that i consistently made was that a government that failed to adequately support the criminalisation of human trafficking through intensive enforcement in practice and by making ef forts to prevent it not only harmed the interests of the individual victims but also undermined public confidence in the value of the protection of human dignity as a foundation of internationally accepted human rights and fundamental freedoms. long legislative process i do feel that it took the netherlands a very long time to bring its legislation into line with the un pa lermo protocol which the netherlands signed in . it is a pity that it took until january . it therefore took longer to build public support in the netherlands. it is also more difficult to win public the office of national rapporteur support for legislation that is based on international conventions than for legislation that is adopted in response to direct calls from the society itself. if it had been left solely to the netherlands i do not think the expansion of the human trafficking article to cover other forms of exploitation would have occurred. people didn t realise and often probably still do not that exploitation also occurred and still occurs in other sectors in the netherlands. the importance of a rapporteur the importance of appointing a rapporteur was that it increased attention for this special offence and highlighted the subject of human trafficking and efforts to combat it for the police the public prosecu tion service politicians and the general public. there is certainly greater public awareness of human trafficking. the importance of catching the perpetrators in this sector has also been highlighted. the victim support organisations realised the importance of a rapporteur from the very beginning. i have always had enormous admiration for the people who work in these organisations. it is they who see the distress of clients most immediately. i was amazed that they did not become disheartened. when i left office the person who spoke on behalf of the social services clearly articulated the growing realisation in the social services of the need to do more to deal with perpetrators. because of my back ground in the public prosecution service they thought that i focused too much on catching perpetrators. it is to the credit of the social services that they can certainly also see the bigger picture. on the other hand the police and the public prosecution service have become more aware of the inte rests of victims. more intensive contacts between the police and the social services have helped in this. they also have a greater understanding of each other s roles. . . johanna suurp first finnish national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings johanna suurp was appointed as finland s first independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in . she worked as rapporteur for a year and was succeeded in the middle of by eva biaudet. at the time of writing johanna suurp was the most recently appointed independent rapporteur so it is interesting to learn of the challenges she faced nine years after the appointment of the first independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings. appointment as finland s first independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings when the decision was taken to appoint an independent rapporteur in finland the authorities first considered establishing the position as part of an existing organisation. the most important criterion was that the rapporteur should be assigned to an independent government organisation. the om budsman for minorities met that criterion. since i was the ombudsman for minorities at that time i was appointed as the first national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in finland. my mandate was actually formulated fairly broadly. it refers to both human trafficking and to related subjects such as pimping and certain serious forms of discrimination. in addition to publishing reports it is important for the rapporteur to build up a good network and to concentrate on the implementation of interna tional legislation. the decision to appoint a national rapporteur of trafficking in human beings was made on the basis of a recommendation by the finnish coordination committee on trafficking in human beings chaired by the ministry of the interior to the finnish government. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring early period as rapporteur at the time that i became the rapporteur in there was already a certain degree of understanding of human trafficking. to say the least there was a growing interest in the subject. there was a growing awareness that human trafficking also occurred in finland that it was not something that only happe ned in other countries. there was a willingness among chain partners to cooperate with other partners and with the rapporteur. although not a lot was known about human trafficking understanding of the phenomenon was increasing. the appointment of an independent rapporteur was well received. challenges facing finland s first national rapporteur one of my greatest challenges was that i had a good and broad mandate but few resources. apart from the rapporteur there was only one staff member. the limited resources could have undermined the office s credibility but although the office only consisted of two people the rapporteur s views were well received in finland. another challenge was to gather information for my reports. formally speaking that was not a problem since i had been given a broad statutory mandate. in practice however it proved difficult to secure information in time for example about investigations. because the police force has a regional struc ture it was difficult to exercise my legal mandate in the various police regions. to do so i had to create a network. i also had to negotiate with the police and labour inspectorate on the timely provision of information. that took time. the importance of a rapporteur the first thing i want to stress is that to have any added value a rapporteur must be independent. that is an absolute precondition. in my view the added value of a rapporteur lies in providing an objective analysis of how human trafficking is being addressed. the rapporteur can expose bottlenecks and make recommendations for resolving them. the rapporteur collects all the relevant information from the different agencies and explores ways of advancing the fight against human trafficking. although i was the rapporteur for only a year we still accomplished a number of things. i devoted a lot of energy to cooperation in the chain. a positive factor was that everyone showed a willingness to cooperate with the national rapporteur. i am also proud of my first recommendation in which i called for every victim of human trafficking to have access to unlimited legal assistance not only during the criminal proceedings against the human trafficker but also during other legal proceedings such as proceedings to secure a residence permit or civil proceedings for victims who have children. my recommendation has led to practical changes in finland. . a look into the future these interviews show that the mandates of the dutch and finnish national rapporteurs on trafficking in human beings are largely similar. both agencies report independently on efforts to tackle human trafficking in their country. both agencies also stress the importance of being independent in order to carry out their tasks. one of the challenges facing them which is also mentioned by the un rapporteur is that of acquiring reliable data. the exchange of information at the international level also remains very important in view of the often transnational nature of human trafficking. the office of national rapporteur in addition to reporting obligations under various un human rights conventions nrm the establish ment of the group of experts on action against trafficking in human beings greta pursuant to the council of europe s convention on action against human trafficking also means that states have to report on their current efforts to tackle human trafficking at a national level. the european commis sion s draft of an eu directive on human trafficking also contains a provision that will require member states to provide information to the commission about efforts to tackle human trafficking. according to the draft the commission will use the information to prepare a report for the european parliament and the european council. although the directive has not yet been adopted it is expected to assign an important role to the proposed anti trafficking coordinator. these developments further underline the importance of monitoring. in june us secretary of state hillary clinton and luis cdebaca ambassador at large of the office to monitor and combat trafficking in persons presented the us state department s tenth annual trafficking in persons report. this report is prescribed by the us trafficking victims protection act of and is intended to encourage countries to intensify efforts to tackle human trafficking. the report describes the situation in more than countries dividing countries into different catego ries known as tiers . tier is the lowest category tier the highest. the netherlands was assigned to tier for the tenth time. for the first time the report also contained an evaluation of measures taken to address human trafficking in the united states itself which is also categorised as tier . recent expansion of the dutch rapporteur s mandate to include child pornography the mandate of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings was extended on october to include reporting on efforts to address child pornography. from the rapporteur will also report on the nature and scale of child pornography in the netherlands. this development was dictated by a widespread sense of urgency after various organisations had observed an increase in the volume of digital images of sexually abused children. various agencies had called for the creation of a national authority and proposed that the investigation or monitoring of efforts to combat child pornography could be added to the responsibilities of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings. the group of experts on action against trafficking in human beings consists of independent experts who moni tor the implementation of the convention by the parties to it and write a report identifying problems. on the basis of greta s report the committee of the parties makes recommendations to a state. the convention does not provide for a procedure to compel the implementation of recommendations. proposal for a directive of the european parliament and of the council on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting victims repealing framework decision jha march com final cod article section . us department of state . trafficking in persons report pp. . available at http www. state.gov g tip rls tiprpt . see for example the programme to improve efforts to combat child pornography of the natio nal police services agency klpd available at www.tweedekamer.nl images h vi bijl age .pdf parliamentary documents ii vi no amended motion by the members de pater van der meer and arib positions of stichting kinderporno op internet and ecpat nederland available at http www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl files biblio ao kinderporno december.pdf. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring a similar idea has actually existed since the appointment of the first national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in . the national monitoring of child pornography is an extension of the current responsibilities of the nati onal rapporteur on trafficking in human beings. child pornography regularly contains elements such as sexual exploitation and coercion that fall within the definition of human trafficking. a similar relationship between child pornography and human trafficking also follows from the council of europe s convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lan zarote convention . in addition to the often transnational nature of these offences information and communication technology ict plays an increasingly important role. in both human trafficking and child pornography ict can be used to target children grooming on chat sites and or by mobile phones or for blackmail with compromising photographs or for distribution or sale. the internet can therefore also constitute an environment for human trafficking. one example of this is forced webcam sex. there is also a growing overlap in the conduct of people engaged in human trafficking and child pornography. the concerns about these effects of information and communication technology on child pornography and human trafficking are shared at international european and national level. the rapporteur will publish a separate report on child pornography. the first report of child porno graphy will probably be published in the first half of . nrm p. . bulletin of treaties . the hague district court may ljn bm . recommendations and developments . introduction this chapter reviews the results of the work of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the ten years since the position was created in the netherlands. it describes the recommendations made by the rapporteur on some important topics and what has been done in response to them. this review gives an impression of the issues that have arisen in relation to efforts to combat human traf ficking in the last years the attempts that have been made to find solutions for those problems and the role played by the rapporteur in that process. this report is not intended to present a complete picture but rather to give some idea of how an independent rapporteur can help to improve policies relating to human trafficking. it was decided to focus on the rapporteur s recommendations because although it is certainly not the only instrument with which the rapporteur can exert influence it is the most prominent. the rapporteur can use the expertise and information that has been accumulated over the years to draw attention to specific subjects accelerate changes promote good practices expose bot tlenecks make suggestions and occasionally actually intervene in an individual case. in this context making a recommendation sends a powerful signal even though its actual effect on policy is not always directly measurable in practice. from the very beginning the rapporteur has made recommendations on subjects that include legis lation immigration policy the position of and help for victims investigation the prosecution and trial of offenders administrative enforcement awareness and identification of victims registration international cooperation and prevention. many of these recommendations all of them covered by the three ps protection prevention and prosecution together with the additional ps punishment and partnership have been endorsed by the government and have led directly or indirectly to improve ments in policy. the national action plan on human trafficking nap performed an important role in that context. in the action plan the government formulated dutch policy on combating human traf ficking adopting many of the recommendations made in the rapporteur s third report and attaching practical measures to implement some of them. in february the action plan was supplemented with additional measures relating mainly to underage victims. another important actor is the task force on human trafficking which was established in in response to a recommendation by the rappor teur. the task force is composed of representatives of some of the key organisations in the fight against human trafficking including the police the public prosecution service the judiciary the ministries the national action plan on human trafficking parliamentary documents ii no. . additional measures to the national action plan on human trafficking parliamentary documents ii no. pp. and . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring most closely concerned with the problem and officials from a number of large cities. the rapporteur is also a member although without executive responsibilities and plays a critical role with respect to the task force. the rapporteur has consistently called for the involvement of ngos in the task force comensha attends its meetings and a formal membership is intended. the task force is responsible for identifying bottlenecks removing obstacles to the effective implementation of the anti trafficking policy through targeted interventions and promoting experiments with new techniques. some of the task force s action points formulated as quick wins reflect some of the more recent recommendations by the rapporteur. the minister of justice has published a reaction also on behalf of other relevant ministers and secretaries to the seventh report. following the fall of the government this reaction was placed on the list of subjects that the lower house of parliament declared controversial in connection with the government s caretaker status. consequently the planned debate on the report between the government and parliament was cancelled. this chapter covers the following subjects developments in legislation international developments help for victims immigration law the chain approach investigation and enforcement identification awareness and training suspects and offenders and prosecution and trial. the developments in efforts to tackle human trafficking will be outlined on the basis of the recommen dations the rapporteur has made since the first report. a subject that is not covered is human trafficking with a view to organ removal. the fifth and seventh reports included information about trends and developments with respect to this form of human trafficking but did not contain any recommendati ons relating to the situation in the netherlands. furthermore no significant changes have occurred in the situation as described in the earlier reports. the rapporteur will continue to monitor this form of human trafficking very closely. . legislation . . article f of the dutch criminal code in the first report the rapporteur said that the definition of human trafficking in the un protocol was a broad definition that covered not only exploitation in prostitution or other types of sexual services as was the case with article a of the dutch criminal code which was the human trafficking provision that applied at that time in the netherlands but also embraced other forms of exploitation such as forced labour or labour under such conditions that one could refer to it as modern slavery. given the obligation to criminalise all phenomena that could be defined as human trafficking including the forced removal of organs the human trafficking article that applied at that time should be amended the rapporteur said. that had not yet been done when the third report was published prompting the rapporteur to stress that dutch criminal law should be brought into line as soon as possible with the internationally accepted basic principles and requirements laid down in the un convention against transnational organised crime the associated un protocol on trafficking in persons and the eu frame task force on human trafficking b. protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in human beings especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organised crime new york november . bulletin of treaties and nrm recommendation . recommendations and developments work decision on combating trafficking in human beings which had by that time in entered into force. the report called on parliament to show urgency in passing the bill to expand the definition of human trafficking. the new human trafficking provision article a of the dutch criminal code entered into force on january . in september it was renumbered as article f without substantive amendment. in contrast to the former article a which was included under the title serious offences against pu blic morals the new article was inserted in the criminal code under the title serious offences against personal liberty thus emphasising the fact that the conduct was punishable not because of the sector in which the exploitation took place but because the exploitation constituted a violation of the victim s personal liberty. this implemented recommendation in the first report. article f replaced the former article a of the dutch criminal code in which only human trafficking in the sense of exploitation in the sex industry was made a criminal offence. it incorporated the terms of the former article a of the dutch criminal code albeit not verbatim so that the further interpre tation in the case law of what constituted criminal behaviour remained valid under the new provision. the new provision marked a significant expansion of the conduct that was made punishable as human trafficking to include in addition to sexual exploitation other forms of exploitation in the area of work and services and the forced removal of organs. . . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry other forms of exploitation it was not known at the time of the introduction of the new human trafficking article whether there was a genuine social need to criminalise exploitation outside the sex industry. neither researchers nor the investigative services knew the scale of its existence in the netherlands although a survey of the litera ture by van der leun and vervoorn did indicate a growing risk. the office of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings bnrm therefore carried out an exploratory study designed to collect case studies on grave abuses in working situations.nrm many people in the netherlands regard slavery as a thing of the past but the case studies collected by bnrm painted a different picture. other forms of exploitation do occur in the netherlands although it was not and is still not possible to conclude on what scale.nrm nrm the entry into force of the new human trafficking article did not establish where reprehensible working conditions become exploitation that falls under article f of the dutch criminal code. the legis lature had left it partially to the courts to determine the precise scope of the new provision but as long as there was very little case law on this point it was difficult to investigate and prosecute other forms of exploitation. the netherlands was not the only country to face difficulties in precisely defining the term exploitation and the associated means of coercion. in february the university of utrecht and bnrm organised an international conference devoted to other forms of exploitation. the pretext for framework decision jha july oj l . nrm recommendation . parliamentary documents ii no. p. explanatory memorandum . van der leun and vervoorn . conference human trafficking turning our attention to labour exploitation february . a lengthy summary of the conference proceedings is available at www.bnrm.nl. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring this conference was a study by coster van voorhout which had shown that other countries encountered similar problems in determining the scope of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry other forms of exploitation . one of the findings to emerge from the conference was the enormous uncer tainty that still exists concerning the boundary between poor employment practices and exploitation. uncertainties about the definition and scope of the means of coercion abuse of a vulnerable position also played a role in the case law.nrm the rapporteur had said in the third report that the legislature should more clearly define the term exploitation in relation to working situations outside the sex industry and not leave it solely to the courts. it is now five years since the human trafficking article was expanded and although there were initially few prosecutions for other forms of exploitation the number of cases brought before the courts has risen steadily. the interpretation of the definition of the offence is also becoming clearer. in the so called chinese restaurant case the supreme court gave clear definitions of the means of coercion abuse of a vulnerable position and abuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs . in that judgment the supreme court also provided guidance on the interpretation of exploitation or the in tention to exploit as an element of the offence. the number of prosecutions and convictions for other forms of exploitation has risen steeply in the netherlands since the supreme court s judgment. that judgment and the later case law has confirmed that the scope of the prohibition on human trafficking for the purpose of other forms of exploitation is becoming steadily clearer. that the term exploitation is being further defined by case law has also become apparent from a number of convictions for exploitation in crime. although this form of exploitation is not explicitly mentioned in the law or in the explanatory memorandum the courts have had no difficulty in also finding that this form of exploitation falls under the definition of the offence in article f of the dutch criminal code. . . prostitution policy and efforts to combat human trafficking there has always been a clear relationship between human trafficking and prostitution in the nether lands. human trafficking has been associated with prostitution ever since it was included in dutch cri minal law.nrm the ban on brothels was removed from the dutch criminal code on october the same year as the office of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings was established. the purpose of that amendment was to decriminalise the exploitation of prostitution and so legalise a situation that was already tolerated. the existence of prostitution is a fact even for the government. that calls for a coster van voorhout j. . see also nrm section . . for a comparative international survey. nrm recommendation . supreme court october ljn bi . for a discussion of this judgment see . . . see also . . . see also nrm pp. and nrm pp. . see the hague district court november ljn az rotterdam district court july not published haarlem district court april ljn bi the hague district court febru ary ljn bl the hague district court march ljn bl dordrecht district court april ljn bm . for a discussion of need usefulness and possibility of regulating or legalising prostitution see for example vermeulen . recommendations and developments realistic approach without moralising said the minister of justice in the explanatory memorandum to the amendment. one of the most important objectives of the bill was to prevent and combat human trafficking. from this perspective the rapporteur made recommendations on a number of aspects of prostitution policy. during the parliamentary debate on the abolition of the ban on brothels the question was raised of whether the categorical prohibition on issuing work permits for work in the sex industry in the foreign nationals employment act implementing decree could be maintained.nrm in the third report the rapporteur said that greater certainty was needed about the course the government proposed taking in that regard. to prevent human trafficking or to make it easier to identify the rapporteur said the government should also clarify its intentions in the longer term with respect to opening up the sex sector in the dutch labour market for new eu nationals for the purposes of salaried employment. after all a lack of clarity about conditions and possibilities is not generally conducive to combating human traf ficking but an excessively intricate system of conditions such as those for the self employed might also be counterproductive because of dependence on third parties that may arise as a result. it has since become clear that the general ban on issuing work permits for prostitutes from outside the eu including prostitutes from romania and bulgaria countries for which the free movement of workers does not yet apply will be maintained. the government has announced that the labour inspectorate will make available capacity for integrated enforcement actions in the prostitution sector instigated by municipalities. the inspectors will also be on the lookout for signs of human trafficking during investigations of illegal employment. act on the regulation of prostitution when the ban on brothels was lifted in it was decided to adopt a system of local regulation of legal prostitution businesses with local authorities granting licences containing conditions. the rapporteur had already said in the first report that although the benefit of decentralised regulation is that it leaves room for local policy diversity of policy would also increase the need for harmonisation of rules and procedures. this is a particularly pressing problem where differences in policy could create the risk of cases of human trafficking occurring not being addressed. in the fifth report the rapporteur recom mended that the legislature should develop a national framework for prostitution policy the basic prin ciple being that every municipality must lay down rules for all establishments where commercial sexual transactions are carried on. in the seventh report the rapporteur stressed the importance of laying parliamentary documents no. see also . . . the amendment had several purposes. six main objectives were formulated . controlling and regu lating the exploitation of prostitution . improving efforts to combat the exploitation of involuntary prostitution . protecting underage persons against sexual abuse . protecting the position of pros titutes . disentangling prostitution and the criminal milieu and . reducing the number of illegal immigrants in prostitution. see nrm p. et seq. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm p. . nrm recommendation . see also . . . or where commercial facilities are provided for such transactions to be performed with or for a third party nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring down rules in the act on the regulation of prostitution to harmonise policy in the municipalities to prevent the so called waterbed effect. in november the bill containing rules on the regulation of prostitution and on combating abu ses in the sex industry act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry appeared. according to the explanatory memorandum the bill is intended to create the most comprehensive possible administrative system that by regulating the sector can improve efforts to address abuses in the sex industry provide better protection for prostitutes and provide better support for combating human trafficking prostitution by minors and forced prostitution through criminal law. accordingly the proposed legislation creates the framework for a robust approach to abuses in the sex industry . contrary to what the title suggests however the bill is mainly concerned with regulating prostitution and sex businesses. in his memorandum in response to the report the minister said on this point that naturally the background to the bill is the concern about abuses but tackling them is not the primary objective of the bill. in december parliament s permanent committees for home affairs and kingdom relations and for justice invited a number of civil society organisations to a meeting to discuss the proposed bill. the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings took this opportunity to reiterate a number of points. the rapporteur said that the current bill still failed to provide sufficient guarantees for effective measures against human trafficking. these comments concerned the lack of uniformity in the rules on issuing licences and the conditions to be attached to them supervision and enforcement the registration of sex workers and the criminalisation of prostitutes. the rapporteur also addressed the question of whether the minimum age for working in prostitution should be raised to but said it was not possible to properly anticipate the effects of raising the minimum age for working in prostitution partly because not enough is known about illegal prostitution. to prevent raising the minimum age from leading to more young people working illegally in prostitution the rapporteur said that it was first necessary to learn more about the world of illegal prostitution and to address it more effectively. the rapporteur therefore recommended first investigating what improvements the changes in the rules governing sex related businesses had yielded in this regard before possibly rai sing the age limit. the rapporteur therefore suggested that the first evaluation of the act article should also investigate the age of sex workers who are working illegally and who are forced to work. nrm recommendation . parliamentary documents no. . rules on the regulation of prostitution and on combating abuses in the sex industry act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry parliamentary documents no. p. . parliamentary documents no. p. . input by the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings to the roundtable discussion on the act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry letter from the rapporteur to the members of parliament s permanent committee for home affairs and kingdom relations and permanent committee for justice december . the letter from the rapporteur to the minister of the interior and kingdom relations of january in response to the draft bill was attached to this letter see nrm p. et seq. and appendix . recommendations and developments the third report contained a recommendation to start a broad debate on the question of whether it should be a criminal offence to consciously buy sexual services from a person who is obviously being forced to provide them. the recommendation said that the discussion should address the desirability and practical enforceability of such criminalisation. the question is still valid particularly in connection with the current legislative proposal. in the government s general reaction to the seventh report on human trafficking the minister of jus tice said that he expected that the act on the regulation of prostitution and combating abuses in the sex industry would make it easier for public authorities and law enforcement agencies to prevent and suppress abuses in prostitution. the minister also noted that the recommendations concerned with the supervision of the prostitution sector had already been adopted in the existing bill. the rapporteur replied to the government s reaction by repeating the concerns she had expressed during the roundtable discussion of the act on the regulation of prostitution on december . the bill says nothing about a duty on the part of the authorities to make best efforts or about the al location of tasks between the local authority and the police. the explanatory memorandum to the act states that it is not usual for a law to include a provision requiring the local law enforcement triumvirate the mayor of a municipality the chief public prosecutor and the chief superintendent of police to make agreements on supervision and enforcement and therefore no such provision was included in the bill. this omission increases the risk that the rules laid down in the law will not be supervised and enforced adequately. accordingly the rapporteur disagreed with the minister s view that the act on the regulation of pros titution would strengthen supervision and enforcement unless it prescribed obligations to make best efforts to do so. the findings in the police monitor confirmed that supervision and enforcement in the prostitution sector are particularly weak elements in efforts to tackle human trafficking. the report by the lower house of parliament subsequently caused the minister of justice who is also acting minister of the interior and kingdom relations to amend the bill in some respects. for example the allocation of tasks between local authorities and the police is further clarified in the bill municipa lities can no longer assign their supervisory duties to the police although the police will remain closely involved and there will ideally be integrated enforcement . the minister has also proposed raising the minimum age for prostitution to . it is also now the intention to register prostitutes in a small number of municipalities at which time an intake interview will be mandatory. victims of human traf nrm recommendation . for more on this subject see . . . letter from the minister of justice reaction to the seventh report of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings january parliamentary documents no. . the minister of justice replied also on behalf of the state secretary for justice the minister of the interior and kingdom relations the minister of social affairs and employment the minister for youth and family and the state secretary for health. letter from the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings to parliament s permanent com mittee for justice regarding the government s reaction to the seventh report on trafficking in human beings february . parliamentary documents no. . parliamentary documents no. memorandum of amendment agema amendment rai sing the age for prostitution from to parliamentary documents ii no. . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring ficking will not be prosecuted for working without being registered the details of this have still to be worked out. the possibility of making arrangements to allow authorities to enquire whether licences have been denied will also be explored. if the minimum age for working as a prostitute is raised to it is a subject that should receive special attention during the periodic evaluations of the act on the regulation of prostitution. it is not self evident as the memorandum in response to the report seems to assume that the study into the effects of raising the age should then fall within the remit of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings. . . maximum sentences from january the maximum sentence for human trafficking without aggravating circumstances was six years imprisonment. the maximum prison sentences for aggravated human trafficking were eight and years and if the offence led to the death of the victim years. since july the maximum prison sentence for all aggravated forms of human trafficking has been at least years. consequently offenders can be held in pre trial detention on the basis of the so called year ground which represents a significant expansion of the possibilities of remanding a person in custody. in the fifth report the rapporteur observed that the sentence for the basic offence at least which was then six years could be described as lenient in comparison with other offences of a similar nature and serious ness. the raising of the maximum prison sentence for non aggravated forms of human trafficking to eight years also makes it possible to bring a prosecution for preparation to commit the offence article of the dutch criminal code .nrm the aggravating circumstance based on the age of sexual majority which is in the netherlands is irrelevant for human trafficking in the sex industry or elsewhere. in the seventh report the rapporteur recommended raising the age of sexual majority creating an aggravating circumstance in article f of the dutch criminal code to . various children s rights organisations had already recommen ded extending the aggravating circumstance in the human trafficking provision with respect to sexual exploitation to all minors.nrm in october the minister of justice said in response to the annual report on children s rights that negotiations are currently underway in brussels on new eu legislation relating to human trafficking. the minister also said that the netherlands supports the provision in the draft legislation that would make all forms of human trafficking committed against a child every person the specific changes are as follows in the first section non aggravated forms of human trafficking the maximum term of imprisonment was raised from six to eight years in the third section human traf ficking performed by two or more persons acting in concert or human trafficking committed against a victim under the age of the maximum term of imprisonment was raised from eight to years in the fifth section human trafficking resulting in serious physical injury or threatening the life of ano ther person the maximum term of imprisonment was raised from to years in the sixth section human trafficking leading to the death of another person the maximum term of imprisonment was raised from to years. the rapporteur had also pointed out in this context that the level of the sentence also has consequen ces for the possibilities of applying pre trial detention nrm p. .level of nrm recommendation . parliamentary documents no. . defence for children ecpat and unicef annual report on children s rights . recommendations and developments under the age of grounds for a heavier sentence and that implementation of the new legislation would probably lead to an amendment of article f of the dutch criminal code. at the time of wri ting the eu directive has not yet been finally adopted. . international developments many of the measures taken to address human trafficking at the national level are a reaction to inter national instruments and treaties.nrm combating human trafficking is a high priority for numerous international governmental organisations including the united nations un the european union the council of europe and the organisation for security and cooperation in europe osce . the measures proposed embrace what can be summed up as the three ps prevention protection and prosecution to which list can be added two more ps partnership and punishment . a number of binding un and eu agreements are particularly relevant for the most recent legislation on human trafficking in the netherlands. they include the un protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children and the eu framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings . these instruments oblige states to make human trafficking a criminal offence and to take measures to combat it and encompass every form of exploitation of persons regardless of the sector in which it occurs. the international definition of human trafficking now covers not only exploitation in prostitution but also other forms of social and economic exploitation and forced organ donation. a number of earlier treaties relating to human trafficking such as the international convention on the sup pression of traffic in women of full age also apply to the netherlands. this convention obliged states at that time it was a draft of a new eu framework decision on human trafficking see nrm p. . after the entry into force of the treaty of lisbon the european commission made a new proposal for a directive see . . . the draft provision concerning this aggravating circumstance was not amended in the new proposal. letter from the minister of justice of october lower house of parliament no. p. . the un rapporteur uses the term promotion of cooperation . see report submitted by the special rapporteur on trafficking in persons especially women and children joy ngozi ezeilo un doc. a hrc february pp. . protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organised crime new york november bulletin of treaties and . framework decision jha july oj l . for a complete list of relevant internati onal legislation see implementation of international legislation to combat migrant smuggling and human trafficking explanatory memorandum parliamentary documents ii no. p. . in fact the definitions of human trafficking used in these instruments often differ somewhat. this explains in part why the offences criminalised in different countries under the title of human traffic king or otherwise are not precisely the same. it is also connected with differences in attitudes towards prostitution. the council of europe and the united nations published a detailed report on this subject in october trafficking in organs tissues and cells and trafficking in human beings for the purpose of the removal of organs http www.coe.int t dghl monitoring trafficking docs news organtrafficking study.pdf consulted on june . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring to make the procurement of women of full age a criminal offence if it is done for immoral purposes to be carried out in another country even with their approval . however efforts to combat human trafficking have to be seen in a wider context. there are many other treaties concerned with these problems including traditionally the slavery convention of the protocol to that convention and the supplementary convention of . human rights treaties are also relevant.nrm the international labour organisation ilo has adopted a number of important instruments including the ilo convention no. on forced or compulsory labour and the ilo convention no. which prohibits the most serious forms of child labour. other more recent anti human trafficking instruments include the european convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse the lanzarote convention which in fact also encompasses child por nography. although it is made a criminal offence in the netherlands under a different provision than the human trafficking provision article f of the dutch criminal code child sex tourism is also internationally regarded as a form of human trafficking. in the very first report the rapporteur referred to the fact that human trafficking would continue to find a fertile breeding ground as long as the gap between rich and poor countries remained and as long as young people found it difficult to make a life for themselves in their own country. the call on the government to devote constant and intensive attention to the root causes of international human traf ficking was repeated in the third report. the rapporteur recommended incorporating factors such as the absence of possibilities for work and development poverty and issues of gender equality more explicitly in relation to human trafficking in relations with other countries including development relationships. this idea was expressed in the action oriented paper on strengthening the eu external dimension on action against trafficking in human beings published at the end of which called for among other things greater synergy between policy areas such as foreign relations development cooperation social affairs employment gender equality and good governance. . . ratification of recent human trafficking conventions by the netherlands the rapporteur referred in the first report to the adoption of the un human trafficking protocol to supplement the un convention against transnational organised crime and called in the first recommendation for the early ratification of these instruments. the protocol is essentially concerned with organised crime but cannot be seen separately from respect for the human rights of suspects and victims. in the third report the rapporteur referred to the fact that if ratification was delayed the nether bulletin of acts orders and decrees . bulletin of acts order and decrees bulletin of treaties bulletin of treaties . resolution trafficking in women and girls for example contains recommendations not only on tackling human trafficking but also explicitly refers to child sex tourism un doc. a res january . the trafficking in persons report published annually by the united states also contains information about efforts made to combat child sex tourism which is prosecuted in the netherlands under article b or article in conjunction with article or a of the dutch criminal code. action oriented paper on strengthening the eu external dimension on action against trafficking in human begins towards global eu action against trafficking in human beings council document . nrm recommendation . recommendations and developments lands would be unable to take advantage of the mechanisms for monitoring and further implementa tion that had already been set in motion and the netherlands would consequently become increasingly unable to maintain its pioneering and leading position in the area of combating human trafficking. the netherlands ratified the protocol for the entire kingdom on july . the council of europe s convention on action against trafficking in human beings was adopted in . the convention is based on the un protocol but applies to all forms of human trafficking whether nati onal or transnational and whether or not connected with organised crime article . in the fifth report the rapporteur called for early ratification of this convention. the netherlands signed the convention on november but took a long time to ratify it. the main reason was that in the course of the ratification process the government decided that it would adopt the maximum scope of protection af forded by the convention and accordingly proposed expanding jurisdiction for the offences defined in the convention in three respects.nrm parliamentary completed its handling of the act of approval last autumn the implementing legislation has already taken effect and the convention entered into force for the netherlands on august . . . human rights approach the basic principle that human trafficking is a violation of human rights and that states are consequently obliged to tackle this phenomenon is now internationally accepted.nrm the netherlands also endorses with a human rights approach to combating human trafficking. the importance of a human rights approach is apparent from the eu action plan on combating hu man trafficking which in accordance with the eu framework decision focuses on the protection of human rights. a human rights approach was also expressed in the un high com missioner for human rights recommended principles and guidelines on human rights and human trafficking adopted in . human trafficking is often one of the subjects addressed by the various human rights agencies of the un which also monitor the legislation and practice in the netherlands. the council of europe s convention on action against trafficking in human beings also makes a clear link nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . act of september containing approval of the council of europe convention on action against trafficking in human beings signed in warsaw on may bulletin of acts orders and decrees . act of november containing a partial amendment of the criminal code the code of criminal procedure and several related laws in connection with legal developments international obligations and identified legal flaws and gaps bulletin of acts orders and decrees decree on its entry into force bulletin of acts orders and decrees . the netherlands ratified on april bulletin of treaties . eu plan on best practices standards and procedures for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings oj c december . framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings july l. trafficking in human beings comprises serious violations of fundamental human rights and human dignity . un doc. e add. . see also gallagher . see for example concluding observations of the committee on elimination of discrimination against women the netherlands un doc. cedaw c nld co february . see also nrm p. et seq. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring between human trafficking and human rights. by virtue of these documents the netherlands is bound by international obligations to protect human rights and consequently to combat human trafficking. this is why the rapporteur has previously recommended that the dutch government should unequivo cally declare itself in favour of an approach to tackling human trafficking primarily within the context of human rights. european convention on human rights a very relevant provision in this context is article of the european convention on human rights echr which outlaws slavery servitude and compulsory labour. in the case of siliadin v. france the european court of human rights ruled in that the parties to the convention are obliged to include provisions in their criminal law making these offences punishable adding that those criminal provisions must also be enforced in practice.nrm in this case the court in strasbourg ruled that french criminal law had failed to afford an underage girl from togo who was living illegally in france and working in a private household under very poor conditions with sufficient and effective protection against the servitude in which she had been held as referred to in article echr. case law of the court in strasbourg shows that the echr also imposes a number of other positive obli gations on states with respect to taking action against human trafficking. a recent judgment of the court illustrates this european court of human rights january rantsev v. cyprus and russia in march the year old russian oxana rantseva died under suspicious circumstances that were never cleared up after falling from a balcony of an apartment building in cyprus. she had en tered the country on a visa to work as an artiste in a cabaret a sector that is often used as a cover for prostitution in cyprus. rantseva had left her workplace three days after she started performing in a cabaret club in limassol. some time later she was found in a discotheque by m.a. the manager of the club where she had worked. he took her to the police station and asked the police to place her in custody as an illegal alien. rantseva was detained at the police station and soon afterwards m.a. was allowed to collect her since there was no evidence that she was living illegally in cyprus. later that afternoon she was taken to a room on the sixth floor of an apartment building. not long afterwards she was found dead on the street. ranseva s father brought a complaint to the european court of human rights against both cyprus and russia partly on the grounds of article echr which prohibits slavery and forced labour. the court ruled that cyprus had violated article echr. it based its decision on two findings. first the court said cyprus had failed to create a suitable legal and administrative framework to combat human trafficking in light of the existing regime of artiste visas. second the cypriot police had nrm recommendation . the first two sections of article of the echr read . no one shall be held in slavery or servitude. . no one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour. european court of human rights july no. . on this point see for example p ivi hirvel judge at the european court of human rights the states positive obligations to protect the victims of human trafficking in the light of echr judgments osce conference successful prosecution of human trafficking challenges and good practices hel sinki september http www.osce.org documents cthb en.pdf. european court of human rights january no. . recommendations and developments failed to take operational measures to protect rantseva against human trafficking despite circum stances that gave rise to a credible suspicion that she might be a victim. russia also violated article because it had failed to investigate how and where rantseva was recruited and more specifically because it took no steps to identify those who were involved in recruiting rantseva or to investigate the methods used to recruit her. human trafficking and article echr the court found that while article echr does not explicitly mention human trafficking proscribing as it does slavery servitude and forced labour the echr is a living instrument which must be inter preted in the light of present day conditions. the court concluded that human trafficking itself runs counter to the spirit and the purpose of article and therefore falls within the scope of that article of the convention. the court therefore found it unnecessary to decide whether the case involved slavery servitude or forced labour consideration and concluded that human trafficking within the meaning of article a of the un palermo protocol and article of the council of europe convention on action against trafficking in human beings falls within the scope of article echr. positive obligations the court went on to find that human trafficking is not to be regarded as solely a criminal matter and recalled that like articles and of the convention article enshrines a basic value consideration . in the court s view in this case article led not only to the specific positive obligation on states to make human trafficking a criminal offence but also the requirement to put in place adequate mea sures regulating businesses often used as a cover for human trafficking consideration . national legislation must be adequate to ensure the practical and effective protection of the rights of potential victims of human trafficking. this also implies that countries must guard against their immigration rules being used to encourage facilitate or tolerate human trafficking consideration . the court discussed at length the system of artiste visas in cyprus specifically mentioning the problem that ca baret managers have to submit the application for an entry visa. this makes the individual concerned dependent on her employer or agent and therefore more vulnerable to exploitation. the system also makes it difficult for the authorities to prove compulsion and human trafficking and to tackle it ef fectively. the court found that cyprus had failed in this regard by maintaining the visa arrangement for artistes doing so moreover despite announcing earlier that it would abolish the system. comprehensive approach the court also noted that the un palermo protocol and the council of europe s convention refer red to the need for a comprehensive approach to combat human trafficking which in addition to measures to punish human traffickers includes measures to prevent trafficking and to protect victims. the extent of the positive obligations arising from article echr has to be seen in this wider context consideration . states are for example required to provide relevant training for law enforcement and immigration officials consideration . article also contains a procedural obligation to investigate situations of potential human trafficking. this duty exists regardless of protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children sup plementing the united nations convention against transnational organised crime un palermo pro tocol bulletin of treaties . bulletin of treaties . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring whether there is a complaint from a victim or next of kin consideration . the court found that the need for a full and effective investigation encompassing every aspect of human trafficking from recruitment to exploitation is unquestionable once again referring to the definition of human trafficking in the un palermo protocol and the council of europe s convention on action against trafficking in human beings. this obligation therefore applied not only to cyprus as the country of destination but also to russia the country where oxana rantseva was recruited. given the international nature of human trafficking states have an obligation to cooperate effectively with the relevant authorities in other states in investigations into human trafficking consideration . states are also obliged to take operational measures to protect victims or potential victims against human trafficking. the court found that such an obligation arises from article echr when the authorities are aware or ought to be aware of circumstances giving rise to a credible suspicion that a person is exposed to a real and immediate risk of being trafficked consideration . with this judgment the court brought human trafficking within the scope of article echr which prohibits slavery servitude and forced labour. apart from the fact that there is limited case law on this provision of the convention the judgment is groundbreaking because the court formulated a number of obligations on member states of the council of europe relating to actions against human trafficking that go beyond investigation and prosecution to include prevention of trafficking protection of victims and international cooperation. preventing collateral damage ngos have referred previously to the fact that measures and policies designed to combat human traf ficking can have a negative effect on the people they are intended to protect collateral damage .nrm some measures to address human trafficking that may benefit certain groups can also stigmatise or restrict the freedom of movement of other groups. the measures taken can also be counter productive with respect to the groups they are designed to protect. that briefly is the message of the report entitled collateral damage the impact of anti trafficking measures around the world published by the global alliance against traffic in women gaatw in . the reason is said to be that states often give precedence to national security fighting crime and guarding national borders against illegal migrants over the rights of trafficked persons. it is in any case important to take prior account of the impact that measures against human trafficking could have on human rights. in the first measure proposed in the national action plan on human trafficking nap was to draw up a list of moments when there was a risk of violations of human rights in relation to prevention investigation and prosecution the protection of victims and where applicable repatriation and rein tegration. no such systematic study has yet been carried out. in the seventh report the rapporteur therefore called on the government to develop a strategy for dealing with the effects of measures taken to combat human trafficking on human rights for the purposes of a human rights approach at the same time recommending that collateral damage should be avoided as far as possible when implementing new policy. see m. boot matthijssen . gaatw collateral damage the impact of anti trafficking measures on human rights around the world www.gaatw.org. national action plan on human trafficking action point . nrm recommendation . recommendations and developments . . international cooperation international cooperation is crucial to efforts to address transnational forms of human trafficking. in this context the rapporteur stated in the third report that the dutch government should declare as a matter of principle whether the standard for law enforcement in relation to human trafficking should be set higher than the purely national level. in the fifth report the rapporteur referred to the importance of initiating or continuing active coope ration with prevalent countries of origin of victims at the time they were bulgaria nigeria romania and the need to be alert to countries where the numbers seemed to be increasing. the rapporteur was not only referring to joint action in investigations and prosecutions but also to coordination of the activities of various organisations dedicated to the prevention of human trafficking and where ap propriate the responsible repatriation of victims. these recommendations have been largely adopted in the measures formulated by the task force on human trafficking in its action plan. the measure concerning intensification of international cooperation contained a number of quick wins for example with respect to cooperation with nigeria bulgaria and romania china and india the establishment of so called rapid action teams rats and cooperation with europol. these forms of cooperation relate not only to investigation and prosecution but partly also to the prevention of human trafficking and shelter for victims and the repatriation of victims. furthermore in the dutch diplomatic missions in important countries of origin of victims were reminded of their role in combating human trafficking. embassies were issued with guidelines for fi nancing anti trafficking projects in particular projects aimed at prevention and reintegration. according to the national action plan on human trafficking embassies provide active support for local projects such as publicity campaigns reintegration programmes and capacity building programmes for the po lice and the judiciary. the rapporteur is regularly invited to provide input for such projects including similar projects organised by other countries. . . international governmental organisations the emphasis in intergovernmental organisations such as the united nations the european union the council of europe and the osce has now shifted from making rules to promoting their implementation. in that context they call for international cooperation the exchange of information and for more coun tries to appoint national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms as well as for a more victim centred human rights approach to the problem. it is also apparent from the activities of these organisations that some subjects have special priority. they include exploitation in sectors outside the sex industry the root causes of human trafficking and the demand side of the phenomenon. special attention is also being devoted at international level to vulnerable groups such as women and children. international attention is also being devoted to the issue of human trafficking in connection with the deployment of soldiers and civilians to areas of conflict.nrm the rapporteur warned in the third report that strengthening international cooperation should not lead to the parallel and independent development of initiatives to address human trafficking with no nrm recommendation . see also . . . action plan of the task force on human trafficking a measure p. et seq. see also task force on human trafficking b. national action plan on human trafficking action point . see appendix for a list of activities of the rapporteur. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring coordination of the efforts of the parties taking the initiatives. better communication and information about pending and current initiatives in the fields of training scientific research and data collection for example would avoid duplication of effort. this recommendation remains relevant if only because of the various initiatives underway with respect to the collection of data. however the recommen dation is also valid with respect to international supervision and monitoring of action against human trafficking. while there is already an eu action plan on combating human traffickingnrm there is now also discussion in the un about the adoption of a global action plan. meanwhile there are various other international reporting obligations concerning action being taken to combat human trafficking. in this context at the last meeting of the informal network of national rapporteurs and equivalent mechanisms the european commission was asked to press for international reporting obligations and requests for national data to be streamlined as far as possible. a useful contribution to the provision of information about current initiatives is a publication by the german bundeskriminalamt that appeared in . it contains an exhaustive overview of national and international activities taken to address human trafficking in the sex industry during the last years. . . the european union in the context of promoting closer international cooperation the rapporteur earlier called for elabora tion of the idea of creating a european criminal law area for transnational forms of organised crime and more specifically for fighting human trafficking. the dutch government should according to the fifth report persist in its efforts to ensure that human trafficking remains on the agenda at the european level and that more is done at that level to build on the accomplishments in the area of human trafficking. those efforts are being made and need to continue. for example the european commission s evaluation of the eu action plan on combating human trafficking in said among other things that the avai lable data showed a wide gap between the legislation in place and its implementation in practice.nrm in april the european commission published the action plan on the implementation of the stockholm programme. the commission formulated a number of actions to address human traf ficking in including the collection of comparable statistics on human trafficking reports on the implementation of the eu action plan on combating human trafficking and on the implementation of the action oriented paper of november .nrm the commission also planned to report this year on the application of directive ec and a possible successor to nrm recommendation . on this point see . . and nrm p. . see nrm p. . see . . second informal meeting of national rapporteurs and equivalent mechanisms june brussels. there are almost programmes. bundeskriminalamt . palermo protokoll und die folgen. bek mp fung des menschenhandels zum zweck sexueller ausbeutung materialsammlung zu nationalen und internationalen eher strategisch ausgerichteten aktivit ten. wiesbaden. nrm recommendation . the stockholm programme was adopted by the european council on december council document . action oriented paper on strengthening the eu external dimension on action against trafficking in human beings towards global eu action against trafficking in human beings council document . recommendations and developments it. the european commission intends to appoint an eu anti trafficking coordinator atc and then wants to present a new integrated strategy for tackling human trafficking in as well as measures to protect and help victims through ad hoc cooperation agreements with third countries. the commission also said that guidelines were needed to help consular services and border guards to identify victims of human trafficking. following the entry into force of the treaty of lisbon on november the european commission converted its proposal for a new eu framework decisionnrm into a proposal for a directive on preven ting and combating human trafficking and protecting victims. in the seventh report the rapporteur said of the original proposal that provisions regarding help for and protection of victims must not lead to restrictions on what has been achieved in the council of europe s convention on action against trafficking in human beings . the bnc fiche an assessment by the government of commission proposals on the current draft directive states in any case that the handling and implementation of the proposal must not be at the expense of ratification by the eu member states of the council of europe s convention. at the time of writing the definitive version of the directive had not yet been adopted. . victims . . prevention aimed at victims and potential victims preventing individuals from becoming victims is an important element of anti human trafficking policy. relevant aspects of prevention are providing information raising awareness and increasing the resilience of potential victims as well as increasing consciousness of the phenomenon on human trafficking in general. the first report contained a call for more intensive and more widespread pu blicity about loverboy practices which even then were common in the netherlands. the rapporteur felt the government had a responsibility in this regard partly from the perspective of promoting emancipation in order to increase the resilience of potential victims who were often young girls. the rapporteur mentioned including information about the subject in the regular school curricu lum as an example of something that could be done. projects to tackle the problem of loverboys including information for schools about the problem have been established in many cities. in the first steps were taken to create a national register of juvenile prostitution and the natio council directive ec of april on the residence permit issued to third country nationals who are victims of trafficking in human beings or who have been the subject of an action to facilitate illegal immigration who cooperate with the competent authorities oj l . action plan implementing the stockholm programme april com final. proposal for a directive of the european parliament and of the council on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting victims repealing framework decision jha march com final cod . nrm recommendation . parliamentary documents session no. p. . bnc stands for beoordeling nieuwe commissievoorstellen . nrm recommendation . nrm pp. et seq. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring nal platform on juvenile prostitution was formed . special programmes were also established for unaccompanied underage asylum seekers while funds were provided to enable municipalities and victim support organisations to arrange programmes designed to help prostitutes who want to leave the profession. in recent years attention has also been devoted to preventing exploitation outside the sex industry through publicity campaigns targeted at potential victims of exploitation outside the sex industry see . . . little is known about the actual impact of prevention programmes. in the fifth report the rapporteur called for research into this subject to facilitate more evidence based action in the future . the results of the so called systematic review of research into human trafficking might be able to provide some answers in a general sense. . . the exchange of information within the chain the third report drew attention to the problem that social workers often receive information in confi dence from victims that may also be relevant for criminal investigations. in view of the importance of their confidential relationship with clients and of not discouraging victims from seeking help social workers cannot simply pass this information on to the police or the public prosecution service. the rapporteur recommended searching for ways of making this information available to the police. this has been partially achieved through the development of local cooperation between the various organi sations in the chain particularly in the large cities. regular consultation and cooperation between the partners increases the mutual trust and removes obstacles. further research into the reasons why victims are unwilling to report trafficking as called for by the rapporteur could increase the confidence of victims and social workers in the positive effects of providing information that is relevant for criminal investigations. the pilot project involving category oriented shelter could have a similar positive effect. nevertheless this subject is still topical. although voluntary agreements could remove formal obstacles to the exchange of confidential information they would not totally safeguard that the handing over of client information would not harm the confidential relationship between the social worker and the victim. nrm p. . in utrecht for example nrm p. . programmes to increase the resilience of unaccompanied undera ge asylum seekers also have an important function in the context of preventing them from becoming victims again in their country of origin. parliamentary documents ii vi no. regulation on exit programmes for prostitutes rups . nrm recommendation . this study jointly initiated by bnrm is being carried out by the wodc the university of amsterdam and the netherlands institute for the study of crime and law enforcement nscr the results of the study which is confined to research into transnational human trafficking are not yet available. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . meeting of the network of organisations for victims of human trafficking in rotterdam april . see also the description in . . of a film about human trafficking commissioned by the ministries of justice of the interior and kingdom relations and of social affairs and employment for professionals who may encounter human trafficking on a regular or occasional basis. recommendations and developments . . shelter category oriented shelter the rapporteur has made a number of recommendations concerning the development of shelter and care tailored to the specific needs of victims of human trafficking in general and specifically of distinct categories of victims such as minors aliens and victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. in the third report this took the form of a recommendation that victim support organisations should provide the central government with advice about whether shelter should be provided by category of victim or whether integrated shelter would be a better option taking into account aspects such as pro per recognition of a person s status as a victim the best use of the expertise available at local level and the need to offer security for victims. in the fifth report the rapporteur further recommended reviewing whether category oriented shelter could help to resolve the problems encountered in finding suitable accommodation for victims in shelters. the rapporteur also recommended adapting the shelters and reception facilities to respond to developments such as growth in the number of victims and changes in the types of victim. the criminalisation of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry was an important factor behind that recommendation. the rapporteur suggested the possibility of specialised centres referring to belgium where other forms of exploitation had been a criminal offence for far longer and where there were separate shelters for men and women and for victims of sexual exploitation and other forms of exploitation. in its action plan in january the task force on human trafficking included the proposal by the state secretaries for justice and for health welfare and sport to start a pilot project involving category oriented shelter in order to investigate whether victims of human trafficking could be provided with safe shelter and how it could be organised on a permanent basis. for this pilot project a tender procedure was organised for the creation of places to be established in existing facili ties. on june the minister of justice opened the pilot project at one of the three selected locations with places for female victims. the intention is that the pilot project will continue until june . the pilot scheme will be evaluated by the ministry of justice s research and documentation centre wodc . shelter capacity there has been a chronic shortage of facilities for the initial reception of victims of human trafficking and of places they can later be transferred to for longer term shelter and specific care in the last decade. the rapporteur has repeatedly drawn attention to this problem. for example in the rapporteur recommended increasing the capacity for shelter and care for underage victims including unaccompa nied underage asylum seekers. the rapporteur also recommended that underage victims should be given shelter separately from adult victims and that help and care should be tailored more specifically to this specific category of victim. she also suggested that the government provide structural financing for victim support organisations to guarantee the continuity of the essential care and shelter for victims that these organisations provide and to increase their professionalism. in the third report the rap nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation task force on human trafficking a measure . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring porteur recommended addressing the shortage of shelter capacity victims by keeping accurate records of available spaces and by creating additional places. the recommendation to provide financial support for victim support agencies was also repeated. in the fifth report the rapporteur suggested investi gating whether measures such as central intake and category oriented shelter for victims could ease the problems with finding suitable accommodation. the urgency of creating sufficient capacity providing support for victim support agencies and improving the registration of details of victims has been acknowledged by the government and translated into action points in the national action plan of human trafficking nap . the plan indicated that the capacity in shelters for women would be expanded. it also stated that the federation of shelters would take measures to improve access to shelters for women as well as improving their safety in order to make them suitable also for victims of human trafficking. the federation would furthermore improve the registration of availa ble places so that the capacity can be better utilised. a study to investigate whether safe houses could be employed to increase safety was also announced. a final proposal was to expand the capacity of shelters specifically for victims of human trafficking the aforementioned pilot project in category oriented shelter. in the rapporteur was forced to observe that there was still a shortage of places in shelters and therefore once again recommended creating additional capacity. the rapporteur also suggested making a start with the pilot project on category oriented shelter which had been seriously delayed. the additi onal places were made available in june and july . the number of places for a projected average stay of three months was thereby increased by albeit only for the duration of the project. it was believed that this could resolve the estimated shortage of places annually but it is not yet certain that it will. comensha the organisation responsible for the central intake said in its annual report for that the pilot project represented a welcome expansion of shelter capacity but that the places would be filled within two months unless there were adequate follow up facilities for the residents. when the minister of justice officially opened the pilot project twelve of the places available in one of the locations were already occupied and two new victims were being admitted every day in consultation with comensha. the capacity was therefore expected to be fully used very quickly. although the action plan for the pilot project stated that the places in the pilot project were in addition to municipalities existing shelter facilities for victims of human trafficking the availability of and capacity in follow up shelter or accommodation remains a matter of concern. the municipalities have a major responsibility in this regard. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . national action plan on human trafficking parliamentary documents ii no. . national action plan on human trafficking action point . national action plan on human trafficking action point the open places reporting centre. national action plan on human trafficking action point . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . annual report comensha p. et seq. project plan for the pilot project in category oriented shelter for victims of human trafficking sum mary p. . the stichting hulp en opvang prostitutie in the hague announced in july that it was forced to impose an immediate freeze on admitting new clients due to an excessive increase in the number of victims of human trafficking registering with it. recommendations and developments . . underage victims victims of loverboys the rapporteur drew attention to the phenomenon of loverboys and their victims in the very first re port. there were many underage victims in the netherlands of traffickers known by this term which is usually used to refer to young men who use seduction techniques to charm vulnerable young girls with the ultimate aim of getting those girls to work for them in prostitution. the rapporteur observed that there was too little specialized shelter for underage victims of human trafficking. this category of victim said the rapporteur deserved special attention shelter and counselling because of the specific nature of these victims and the problems that the young victim encounters. care and shelter for underage victims has remained a persistent area of concern. in the seventh report the rapporteur recommended that underage victims should also be covered by aforementioned pilot project on category oriented shelter pointing out that it was difficult to see why the purpose of the project which was to investigate how to provide shelter that is safe adequate and otherwise tailored to the needs of victims did not extend to underage victims in the netherlands. in reply to questions in parliament the minister for youth and family said he did not feel that specialised shelters for this group were necessary because the existing facilities in the youth care system were in principle capable of handling any conceivable problem. the minister referred to outreach projects to help victims of pimp boys and to victim support programmes by the youth care services aimed at increasing the resilience of girls who are vulnerable to pimp boys. these programmes are organised as part of the regular youth care service. if closed care is needed to prevent a young person from leaving or being removed from care the young person can be admitted to a closed youth shelter facility the minister said. in itself it is understandable that the government regards care for underage victims as a task of the youth care services. however there are no special facilities in the residential youth care system for victims of human trafficking for whom the need for shelter is indicated. the rapporteur had already said in the fifth report that simply locking up girls to protect them from themselves and their traffickers was highly undesirable and urged that attempts be made to find alternatives. although it is unfortunately sometimes inevitable that underage victims have to be accommodated in a closed or protected facility to prevent them from running away and to isolate them effectively from the influence and threats of the loverboy it is important that the facilities do not have the image or the regime of detention centres. given the long standing and serious nature of the problem it might have been expected that a vision would be formulated on the subject of shelter for underage victims of loverboys. that is one of the rea sons the rapporteur addressed one of her recommendations in the seventh report to the task force on human trafficking calling on it to devote special attention to underage victims. she referred in that context to the experience that has already been gained with providing specialised shelter and assistance outside the youth care services. nrm p. et seq. nrm recommendation . see also . . figure proportion of underage victims among dutch nigerian and other non dutch reported victims . attachment to parliamentary proceedings ii no. and n. . for a discussion of the debate about the use of the terms loverboy or pimp boy see nrm p. . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring victims of loverboys are not always exploited in the sex industry. they are sometimes also induced to smuggle drugs or take out loans. nor does the loverboy technique still primarily involve creating an emotional bond with girls in order to exploit them. sometimes the far more direct and quicker method of violence or blackmail is employed. one of the consequences is that the characteristics of victims can change. for this reason the rapporteur recommended in the seventh report that victim support organisations should be mindful of the changing nature of the methods used by human traffickers and ensuing changes in the categories of victims. in any case it is clear that the internet has rapidly as sumed a more prominent role in recent years a role that is likely to grow even further . unaccompanied underage aliens among underage victims of human trafficking the rapporteur has particularly highlighted the situation of unaccompanied underage aliens reporting that they even more than their dutch fellow sufferers often face physical and psychological pressure as a result of their uncertain position and future either in the netherlands or in their country of origin. in the first report the rapporteur said that structural attention should be devoted to the safety of women and unaccompanied underage asylum seekers in asylum centres. unaccompanied underage aliens face a heightened risk of falling victim to human trafficking. some are brought to the netherlands to work in prostitution under false pretences. others are recruited later in a shelter using loverboy techniques or otherwise. a study showed that the re ception centres for aliens do not afford a safe refuge for female unaccompanied underage aliens and do not protect them adequately against the risks of human trafficking. a great many girls went missing and there were fears that a significant number of them had fallen prey to human traffickers. this prompted a number of the relevant organisations including the immigration and naturalisation service ind the central body for the reception of asylum seekers coa the police and several shelters to draft the protocol on missing unaccompanied underage aliens which contains guidelines for preventing or dea ling with the disappearance of children from the centres. other measures included the introduction of round the clock supervision and the fingerprinting of the children at the start of the procedure. a pilot project was started for unaccompanied underage aliens at the greatest risk of disappearing at that time those from india and nigeria . this pilot project with protected shelter started on january and ran until the spring of . the shelter was small and the supervision was intensive. the young people were only allowed to leave the shelter with permission and under escort if necessary. camera surveillance and security guards were also used. nrm p. . nrm recommendation . zanetti . unaccompanied underage asylum seekers form a distinct group within the category of unaccompanied underage aliens. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm p. . brouns et al. . nrm p. . letter from the minister for immigration and integration to the lower house of parliament decem ber . parliamentary documents ii no. recommendations and developments the pilot project was evaluated by the wodc and the willem pompe institute of the university of utrecht . among their conclusions were the following the number of unaccompanied underage aliens of the predetermined at risk nationalities entering the shelter fell sharply during the project probably as a result of successful police investigations. the percentage of disappearances declined partly as a result of the pilot project. there was no increase in the numbers returning to their country of origin. young people who had not actually been exploited often did not want protection. few reports of human trafficking were made. among the possible explanations some young people are not yet ready to report they claim they face no risk of exploitation they are afraid of the police or of reprisals from the traffickers the lawyer first wants to await the outcome of the asylum procedure. when reports were made it was often decided not to prosecute the case or nothing more was heard about it. placement in the protected shelter involves deprivation of liberty although there is no statutory basis for it or judicial review. . . victims of other forms of exploitation exploitation in sectors outside the sex industry other forms of exploitation was made a criminal of fence in . there was no intention to create a distinction between exploitation in the sex industry and in other sectors the treatment of victims and the facilities provided for them should be the same. nevertheless mindfulness of the situation of victims of other forms of exploitation has grown slowly. the victims themselves are often more reluctant than victims in the sex industry to disclose their ex periences. they do not always see themselves as victims but it could also be connected with the fact that many are living or working illegally in the netherlands the fear of deportation the fear that their statement will have negative consequences for colleagues who are working illegally the fact that the situation in their country of origin is possibly even worse or accumulated debts. threats can also pay a role in some cases of other forms of exploitation and victims of other forms of exploitation can also feel shame at what has happened to them. furthermore other forms of exploitation are often perceived as a less serious form of human trafficking. indications of other forms of exploitation are frequently not recognised passed on and followed up. for a long time the number of prosecutions remained relatively small and it is still by no means automati cally assumed that facilities for victims such as shelter and help also apply for victims outside the sex industry. the someren case illustrated this. in the case of the asparagus farm in someren it was revealed that foreign workers had been forced to work and had been accommodated in slavery like conditions. various authorities were aware of at least six different indications of exploitation. nevertheless the foreign employees were not in formed about the b regulation they were not given adequate shelter they were housed in three letter from the minister of justice reaction to the seventh report of the national rapporteur on traf ficking in human beings january parliamentary documents no. p. . kromhout et al. . nrm p. . nrm p. . see below . . . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring large tents they were not interviewed or otherwise treated as possible victims and they were not reported to comensha. none of the relevant authorities including the mayor the labour inspecto rate the police the municipality the fire brigade and the public prosecution service identified the incident as a possible case of human trafficking even though the mayor did describe the conditions as modern slavery. later a prosecution was brought based on a suspicion of human trafficking. a common practical problem that arises in providing shelter and help for victims outside the sex industry is that the number of victims involved in a single case can be large as in someren where there were possible victims . another is that the victims are relatively frequently men for whom it is difficult to find shelter because the shelter facilities are traditionally designed for women. however this cannot be a reason for departing from the relevant procedures such as the requirement to inform possible victims of the b regulation if there is even the slightest indication of human trafficking. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry is a violation of human rights and the need for shelter is often equally great. in principle the seriousness of the exploitation does not depend on the sector in which it occurs. naturally the need for shelter and help can vary very significantly. the rapporteur recommended expanding facilities for victims and adapting them to the changing target group and more attention has been devoted to the question of facilities for male victims since then. for example places were reserved for them in the pilot project on category oriented shelter. in the so called male shelter pilot project two of the places in each of the four large cities were reserved for victims of human trafficking. in its reaction to the recommendations in the seventh report the government said an attempt would be made to extend this pilot project. the rapporteur also recommended that the agencies involved in tackling other forms of exploitation should make agreements on who is responsible for initiating help for possible victims of those forms of exploitation and draw up schedules laying down out which agency will do what and when to ensure that victims do not fall through gaps in the system. . immigration law . . b regulation at the time of the reform of dutch immigration law in the so called b regulation was inserted in the aliens act implementation guidelines for victims and witnesses of human trafficking without a valid residence permit replacing the former b regulation in the aliens act implementation guidelines . under the b regulation aliens who are victims or possible victims or witnesses of human trafficking can remain legally in the netherlands during the investigation and prosecution of a case so that they remain available to the police and public prosecution service. the b regulation is a hybrid measure. on the one hand the rules are intended to ensure the availability of victims for the nrm recommendation . dijk et al. . letter from the minister of justice reaction to the seventh report of the national rapporteur on traf ficking in human beings january parliamentary documents ii no. p. . nrm recommendation . aliens act implementation guidelines april . eu nationals can also acquire rights under the regulation. recommendations and developments purposes of an investigation and prosecution. on the other hand the regulation entitles the victim to temporary residence and access to certain facilities. this brings with it the risk that the scheme might be abused by individuals in an attempt to remain in the netherlands. equally however there is a risk that the victim s rights will not be respected if he or she is unable or unwilling out of fear or for any other reason to cooperate with the police and public prosecution service. the rapporteur has made a series of recommendations in connection with the b regulation in the last decade. willingness to report human trafficking is an offence that can be prosecuted without a complaint. the investigation and prosecution of human trafficking are regarded as important in the interests of protecting general social values. the police must always start an investigation if there is any indication of human trafficking even if there is no report. nevertheless the cooperation of victims is very valuable. it is very important in the fight against human trafficking that victims report incidents and are willing to report and otherwise cooperating with the criminal process. over the years however it has been apparent that for various reasons victims find it difficult to report a crime so policies are needed to increase the willingness of victims to report. in the very first report the rapporteur said that the b regulation was a step in the right direction for victims without a valid residence permit but was still not sufficiently concerned with providing facilities for victims. consequently the benefits of the regulation for the victims were often outweighed by the risks they faced in reporting an offence. the rapporteur therefore recommended that victims should also be offered legal assistance and protection under the b regulation. in the third report the rapporteur went further and recommended that all of the authorities involved in implemen ting the b regulation should inform victims as quickly an as completely as possible about their rights and options under the b regulation as regards both social security and the criminal law and immigra tion law aspects. sufficient opportunities should also be created in consultation with the competent authorities to provide concrete and adequate legal assistance in those areas. the rapporteur added that it would be inappropriate to restrict access to or the duration of the assistance. the rapporteur said it was important to guarantee that victims of human trafficking received good legal advice on all relevant areas of the law immigration law criminal law but also labour law for example adding that victims should be advised of the possibility of receiving legal advice at the earlier possible moment. for aliens living illegally in the netherlands that is the moment when they must be offered the reflection period on the grounds of the b regulation. in this context see the rapporteur s reaction to the advisory report protect victims and fight human trafficking. an advisory report on a balanced protective regime for the victims of human trafficking by the advisory committee on migration affairs acvz nrm pp. this section was not in the english version and appendix instructions on human trafficking and other forms of exploitation in prostitution government gazette . nrm p. et seq. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring these recommendations prompted a number of amendments to the b regulation. a provision was inserted that the care coordinator would be ultimately responsible for the shelter of the suspected victim during the reflection period. the care coordinator would arrange a medical examination and medical treatment if necessary and ensure that the victim was properly informed of the legal conse quences of reporting a crime. if necessary the legal aid board would be asked to finance the necessary legal assistance. another recommendation was that it should be possible for victims to work and follow training during the period of the temporary residence permit to avoid the risk of their falling back into their former situation. the b regulation now includes a provision allowing work to be performed although not during the reflection period. once the residence permit has been granted the victim can also avail of the possibilities to follow a training course and to engage in other activities . following the third report the government produced the national action plan on human trafficking nap which contains a series of specific measures in the different policy areas. in the nap the gover nment said that municipalities would be informed of the policy changes concerning work and training and would be encouraged to help victims with b status to find suitable work and provide them with advice. it also said that legal aid counsellors would also be informed of the various possibilities for securing financing for legal aid. in the seventh report the rapporteur addressed the problem raised by the police and the public prosecu tion service that reports of human trafficking made by aliens without a residence permit sometimes con tained few if any leads for an investigation. in view of the priorities that have been set these cases take up the resources of the police and the public prosecution service as well as the shelters but cannot ultimately be successfully resolved. there are various reasons why reports might contain few leads the failure to record the report properly reluctance on the part of the victim because of fear or shame manipulation of the victim s story by the human trafficker and perhaps also false claims by individuals that they are victims. on the one hand the police and the public prosecution service repeatedly report problems with the waste of resources in these hopeless cases while at the same time victim support workers say that cases involving foreign victims are not properly dealt with. bnrm has been involved in attempts to find solutions for the tensions arising from the b regulation. in for example it organised an expert meeting on hopeless b applications . this was followed by the recommendation in the care coordinators have not yet been appointed everywhere nrm p. . aliens act implementation guidelines b . . and . . government gazette . . . nrm recommendation . see also nr recommendation . aliens act implementation guidelines b . work is allowed no work permit is required. aliens act implementation guidelines b . . . national action plan on human trafficking parliamentary documents ii no. . national action plan on human trafficking action point . national action plan on human trafficking action point . see the public prosecution service s instructions on human trafficking government gazette . nrm pp. et seq. nrm p. . nrm p. . recommendations and developments seventh report to conduct further research into the reasons for the unwillingness of victims report trafficking after it was revealed that a highly relevant study into this subject by the research depart ment of the public prosecution service wbom had been halted.nrm to this end the rapporteur recommended accelerating the procedures such as the decision not to prosecute and the hearing of objections conducting research into the reasons for the absence of leads and the reluctance of victims to report crimes. she also suggested the possibility of carrying out a pilot project in which a number of cases with few leads would be investigated intensively to discover whether and if so how and in which cases it would be possible to generate more leads. such a pilot project could also address the question of whether more specific forms of assistance in category oriented shelters could help to improve the quality of reports. the minister of justice had previously acknowledged that a person whose statement provided few leads in a case could nevertheless still be a victim of human trafficking. in his reaction to the seventh report the minister of justice said among other things that the public prosecution service would review the problems and consider ways of accelerating the procedures in such a way as to limit the unnecessary waste of resources. the task force could implement measures in res ponse to the findings. the minister also said he saw no need for a pilot project relating to the willingness of victims to report trafficking for example because the pilot project involving category oriented shelter could have a positive effect on the willingness to report. expansion of the regulation the rapporteur referred in the first report to the fact that under the original b regulation no reflection period could be granted to possible victims of human trafficking who had not already worked as prostitu tes in the netherlands. this was a reference to aliens who were identified as possible victims of human trafficking by the royal netherlands marechaussee on their arrival at schiphol. the rapporteur remarked that it was possible that opportunities for prosecutions were being needlessly missed by excluding this category of victim. given the often transnational nature of human trafficking even before they reached the netherlands these victims might already have been exposed to traumatic experiences that would nrm recommendation . on this point see also . and . . the study entitled het slachtoffer en zijn ketens. een studie naar mensenhandel in strafrechtelijk perspectief was published by the verwey jonker institute in the autumn of . nrm recommendation . letter from the minister of justice to the lower house of parliament of june tk . letter of january also on behalf of the state secretary of justice the minister of the interior and kingdom relations the minister of social affairs and employment and the minister for youth and family. letter from minister of justice reaction to the seventh report of the national rapporteur on traffic king in human beings january parliamentary documents ii no. . at the time of writing noting is known of the outcome of this. in its annual report for comensha mentioned a study into the willingness of east european vic tims of human trafficking to report the crime carried out by a student of criminology from the national police services agency klpd annual report comensha p. . at the time of writing the study had not yet been published. nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring prevent them from immediately report trafficking in human beings. the rapporteur therefore recom mended that the reflection period should also be available to victims in this category. in response to this a provision was inserted in the aliens act implementation guidelines to the effect that the rules on the reflection period would also apply to aliens who had not yet entered the nether lands but who might be victims of human trafficking. the rapporteur also proposed that restricting the b regulation to persons who made a report of human trafficking could unnecessarily exclude victims who did not dare to report but were prepared to make another form of statement to the police about what had happened to them. dutch criminal law makes no distinction between the evidentiary value of a report and of other statements. the distinction is therefore irrelevant for the application of the b regulation what counts is the cooperation with the investigation and prosecution. in light of that the rapporteur recommended equating a report and any other statement for the purposes of the b regulation. this recommendation was adopted thereby making a report the same as otherwise cooperating with a criminal investigation under the aliens decree and the b regulation. consequences under immigration law arising from the non punishment principle under immigration law criminal antecedents are an incriminating factor for an alien. it is possi ble however that the offences were committed by a victim of human trafficking in a situation of exploitation. that prompted the rapporteur to recommend that a person s status as victim and the relationship between the offence committed by the victim and the human trafficking situation should be taken into account in decisions made under immigration law. the rapporteur stressed that every victim who cooperated with the criminal investigation against a human trafficker should be eligible for the rights under the b regulation in principle even when the victim has criminal antecedents adding that the fact that the person is a victim and the relationship with the offence committed by the victim should be explicitly taken into account when making a decision of whether to declare a person an undesirable alien or whether to grant continued residence. this recommendation was based on the non punishment principle an international principle to the effect that victims of hu man trafficking should not be punished for offences committed in a situation where they are being exploited. the recommendation that no victim who cooperates with a criminal investigation against the human trafficker should be denied the rights ensuing from the b regulation also relates to the situation where there is no connection between the offence committed by the victim and the human trafficking situation. this is based on the consideration that the importance of the information that a victim can provide with a view to a possible prosecution should prevail over considerations based on immigration policy. nrm recommendation . aliens act implementation guidelines p. ad a. entry into force on january government gazette . see nrm p. . nrm recommendation . article . of the aliens decree. aliens act implementation guidelines p. ad b. see nrm chapter . recommendations and developments in his reaction to the seventh report the minister of justice also speaking on behalf of other relevant ministers said that he agreed with this recommendation. in a letter to the lower house of parliament on february however the rapporteur pointed out that it was apparent from the further explana tion given by the minister in his letter that he was thinking mainly of criminal offences that were commit ted in relation to a situation of exploitation. the rapporteur s recommendation however also refers to situations in which that relationship is less direct. it would not be effective to let slip opportunities for suc cessful prosecution by not allowing victims with criminal antecedents to benefit from the b regulation. reflection period the b regulation prescribes that aliens without a residence permit must be offered a reflection period at the slightest indication of human trafficking. in the rapporteur pointed out that victims so metimes needed more than three months to recover sufficiently and to become calm enough to make a clear decision on whether to report human trafficking. in view of the importance of the victim s coope ration with criminal proceedings the rapporteur therefore recommended creating an option in the b regulation for the reflection period to be extended once by an additional three months. this recom mendation did not lead to a specific policy change. in the eu member states the reflection period varies from days to six months. the regulation more than meets the requirements of the eu directive on residence permits issued to third country nationals who are victims of trafficking in human beings. the b regulation in practice the recommendations extended not only to the b regulation itself but also to its implementation in practice. for example in the third report the rapporteur drew attention to the fact that the relevant agencies implemented the b regulation very differently in practice pointing out that the correct and uniform application of the regulation would benefit if the agencies explained their tasks more clearly to each other and to their own employees. the rapporteur went on to recommend that all chain partners should immediately inform victims of all their rights under the scheme. although no distinction is made in the b regulation between victims of sexual exploitation and exploi tation in other sectors other forms of exploitation potential situations of other forms of exploita tion are in practice dealt with differently than sexual exploitation. potential victims of other forms of exploitation are not always recognised as victims and are consequently not alerted to their rights under the b regulation and are not offered a reflection period. these discrepancies are due to differences of perception rather than differences in the rules. letter from minister of justice reaction to the seventh report of the national rapporteur on traf ficking in human beings january parliamentary documents ii no. p. . letter from the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings to parliament s permanent com mittee for justice concerning the government s reaction to the seventh report on trafficking in human beings february . nrm recommendation . see academic network for legal studies on immigration and asylum in europe synthesis report writ ten for the european commission in relation to the implementations by eu member states of directive victims of trafficking jls b . council directive ec oj l . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring at the instigation of the rapporteur the text of the b regulation was amended in april with the aim of reflecting more clearly that the regulation extends to victims of exploitation in sectors outside the sex industry. to ensure proper implementation of the b regulation the rapporteur recommended establishing a cen tral office with the task of monitoring problems with the implementation of the regulation providing ad vice on how to solve them and if necessary intervening. the rapporteur recommended the creation of an authoritative body given the multiplicity of disciplines involved in the implementation of the regulation. in response to the recommendations in the third report the government said in the nap that the so called b platform the comensha platform could perform that function for the time being. this platform hosts regular meetings of representatives of the organisations most closely involved in imple menting the b regulation. in the first report the rapporteur described the experience of many victim support workers that aliens who might be victims of human trafficking were often deported as illegal aliens before there was a chance to apply the b regulation or before they were given an opportunity to invoke it. this is not only undesirable from a humanitarian viewpoint but might also mean the loss of evidence that could lead to prosecution. the rapporteur therefore recommended that the ind the aliens police and the criminal investigative services should cooperate more closely and agree on ways to improve the situation. this recommendation was repeated in the third report noting that it was essential to avoid not apply ing the b regulation in practice. when a lot of emphasis is placed on the importance of the immediate deportation of illegal aliens and insufficient attention is paid to the possibility that they are victims of human trafficking the reflection period is rarely offered according to the rapporteur who recommen ded that structural measures should be taken to prevent this. at that time the minister for immigration and integration had recently published a policy document on illegal aliens in which she had said that the approach to illegal aliens and combating human traf ficking were in principle two separate policy areas. but the two areas do overlap and measures taken in one policy area can reinforce measures in the other. the policy document made a number of proposals in that context and also announced that further measures would follow after the publication of the rapporteur s third report. following publication of that report the government published the national action plan on human trafficking in which it endorsed the need for structural measures to prevent the b regulation not being applied in practice particularly with respect to offering the period of reflection to decide whether to report human trafficking. the government said that the relevant agencies had taken part in a conference in november to explore ways of improving the implementation of the b regulation and that they had started making the improvements suggested at that conference in rela tion to sharing information and identifying problems as well as providing information to victims and creating files. the government also acknowledged the possibility of a conflict at local level between the government gazette . nrm recommendation . national action plan on human trafficking action point . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . parliamentary documents ii no. . national action plan on human trafficking p. . recommendations and developments supervision of aliens and the application of the b regulation and mentioned that the ministry of justice was subsidising a study by humanitas bonded labour in nederland blinn into the question of whether b status was actually being offered to potential victims. in the report of that study blinn said that victims in aliens detention were often not recognised as victims. a number of steps have since been taken with regard to the identification of possible victims of human trafficking in aliens detention and attention for this group has increased. for example in the ministry of justice arranged several meetings with representatives of the police ind stichting tegen vrouwenhandel stv now comensha the international organization for migration iom and blinn to look for solutions to problems relating to the identification of and support for potential victims in this group. in january blinn published another report about victims of human trafficking in aliens detention. in this report blinn mentioned several practical bottlenecks in the implementation of the b regu lation. once again its principal conclusion was that identification of victims of human trafficking in aliens detention needed to improve. in a reaction to the report the government pointed out that since a lot had been done to improve the identification of victims and that the subject was still receiving attention. nevertheless the state secretary said it is not always possible to avoid detaining suspected victims of human trafficking. linking assistance to cooperation the rapporteur has drawn attention to two situations that are not covered by the b regulation. in the first report the rapporteur found that there might be situations where the victim is willing to cooperate but no investigation is launched for reasons over which the victim has no control such as the fact that the suspect cannot be traced. the victim is then no longer entitled to temporary residence under the b regulation and should consequently be deported. the rapporteur took the position that if shelter and assistance are appropriate for humanitarian reasons in such exceptional situations it should be possible to make an exception to the rules on deportation and recommended including that option in the regulation. in the third report the rapporteur highlighted the situation where a person who is clearly a victim for example according to the list of indications employed by the police does not want to cooperate because for example he or she does not dare to report human trafficking or even consider to do so. the rapporteur recommended that in such cases where the b regulation does not apply shelter and assistance should still be offered to the victim. in the nap the government acknowledged that there are persons who do not dare to cooperate but who are clearly victims and need help. the government pointed out that those victims could apply for asylum and receive assistance in that context and an nounced a policy to inform victims of that option. further measures followed such as the incorpora tion in the aliens act implementation guidelines of an ex officio assessment against the b regulation in the asylum procedure. national action plan on human trafficking p. action point . claessen . nrm p. . parliamentary documents ii no. and no. . see also nrm p. . nrm recommendation nrm recommendation . national action plan on human trafficking p. . government gazette . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring the above recommendations have not led to legislation for victims beyond the b regulation but there are still some possibilities in practice. when a victim who is unwilling or unable to cooperate requests a residence permit on humanitarian grounds the ministry of justice will sometimes grant that request on the grounds of the discretionary power of ministers to depart from existing policy. . . continued residence chapter b of the aliens act implementation guidelines contains rules for continued residence of aliens after the temporary b residence permit has expired. the regulation can be invoked if repa triation to the country of origin would have unacceptable consequences for the individual concerned and for his or her family. the rapporteur has also made a number of recommendations concerning this regulation. cooperation and conviction the regulation was originally intended only for victims who had reported trafficking. the rapporteur concluded that as in the case of the b regulation the b regulation should apply in full to victims who had otherwise fully cooperated with the investigation and prosecution and made a recommenda tion to this effect and recommended accordingly. the aliens act implementation guidelines were amended as suggested. a condition for qualifying for continued residence in the original regulation was that the criminal pro ceedings had to result in a conviction for human trafficking. the assumption was that repatriation in that case would involve risks for the individual concerned. the rapporteur said that there should also be a presumption in law that repatriation would involve those same risks if the victim reports human trafficking and human trafficking is included in the indictment but the accused is convicted of another offence related to the human trafficking but not of human trafficking itself. the rapporteur called for the inclusion of a provision in the regulation to the effect that there would be a presumption in law that the aforementioned risks would also apply in that case. the government also adopted this recommendation. the provision in the aliens act implementation guidelines actually goes even further stating that there is a presumption that repatriation involves risks for a victim if the accused is convicted of any offence in an indictment that includes human trafficking. with this amendment of the b regulation the primary responsibility for deciding whether a person is a victim has shifted from the judge to the public prosecutor since a conviction for any other offence even if the accused is acquitted of human trafficking constitutes grounds for continued residence. the rapporteur pointed out that the effect of this would be to leave victims in uncertainty about whether they will be granted continued residence for an unnecessarily long time since it is already clear at the time of the decision to prosecute that he or she is already regarded as a victim by the public prosecution letter of october from the state secretary of justice to the lower house of parliament parlia mentary documents ii no. .. nrm recommendation . aliens act implementation guidelines b under a. nrm recommendation . aliens act implementation guidelines b under b. the relationship with the human trafficking offence is therefore dropped. recommendations and developments service. the rapporteur therefore recommended bringing forward the time at which continued resi dence is granted under the b regulation from the time of conviction to the time of the decision to prosecute. she added that this practical amendment could also make victims more willing to report crimes with sufficient leads for a successful prosecution adding that it would remain necessary to create guarantees to ensure that the victim remains available and willing to cooperate with the investigation and prosecution. in the government s response to this point it said that the relevant chain partners were investigating how they could implement the recommendation to provide victims with certainty about their claim to continued residence as soon as possible without harming the interests of the investigation and prosecution. the minister of justice noted that he did not feel that granting a residence permit for an indefinite period was always the most appropriate instrument for that. in response the rapporteur repeated that it would be possible to grant a conditional residence permit and pointed out that in practice the decision to launch a prosecution almost always resulted in a residence permit being granted. the rapporteur also recommended that the presumption that the repatriation of the victim involves risks if the traffickers concerned are convicted should be adopted not only for victims who have reported human trafficking but also for witnesses who have reported. the government has not yet responded to this recommendation. three year period the b regulation contains an additional ground for continued residence. as the rules that have ap plied since august are formulated an application could also be granted if the alien concerned had been living in the netherlands for at least three years under a b permit at the time of the judgment. the idea behind this provision was that after three years the most important humanitarian factor was the length of time the victim had lived here. the rapporteur pointed out that as it was formulated the rule did not entirely meet its purpose. because the time of the judgment in the trial was decisive and the length of criminal proceedings varies it is impossible to ensure that victims who cooperate with the investigation and prosecution do not remain in uncertainty about their continued residence in the netherlands for longer than three years. the rapporteur recommended that the rules should express more clearly that after three years of residence under the b regulation the length of time the victim has lived in the netherlands constitutes the humanitarian grounds for approving an application for continued residence. this recommendation has been adopted. nrm p. . nrm recommendation . letter from the minister of justice reaction to the seventh report of the rapporteur on trafficking in human beings january parliamentary documents ii no. p. . letter from the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings to parliament s permanent com mittee for justice on the government s reaction to the seventh report on trafficking in human beings february . nrm recommendation . nrm pp. . nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring safe repatriation even if neither of the grounds in the b regulation applies it remains important to enquire whether it would be sound to repatriate the victim to his or her country of origin. the rapporteur has recommended that the applicant s burden of proof should not be too onerous. because the government may not send an alien back to the country of origin if that would create unacceptable risks for the safety of the alien or his or her relatives the government has a duty to conduct an investigation that is sufficient to make a proper risk analysis. in the first report the rapporteur had already said that although repatriation of the victim to the country of origin might be an option it is not enough to wait and see whether the alien concerned can show that repatriation involves unacceptable risks. in the third report the rapporteur called for additi onal measures to prevent revictimisation and to protect them from reprisals by traffickers. the rapporteur said that when in specific cases despite these measures the victim s safety is not guaranteed repatriation is unacceptable and the individual concerned should be allowed to stay longer in the netherlands. the rapporteur further remarked that sound policy on this point would give partners in the anti traffic king chain the confidence not to advise victims against reporting humen trafficking. increasing the resilience of victims and improving conditions in the country of origin are other factors that influence the likelihood of victims again falling victim to human traffickers. with that in mind the rapporteur recommended setting up programmes in the netherlands to strengthen the position of victims and investing in improving conditions in countries of origin . in the nap the government said that efforts would be made to intensify international cooperation through bilateral or multilateral agreements with countries of origin for example in order to facilitate safe repatriation. this principle is incorporated in various examples of international cooperation. for example iom nederland has been involved in setting up referral mechanisms in the cities of benin and lagos in nigeria since . the purpose of this project which started on october is to identify the relevant social services and ngos and draw up agreements with them for the reception of victims both those identified locally and those who have returned from western countries. the netherlands also finances projects in bulgaria and romania to help these countries to expand and improve their reception facilities. in the seventh report the rapporteur returned to the issue of the safety of victims who have been repa triated. she recommended that steps should be taken to ensure that earlier agreements to create security files so that repatriation can proceed in a responsible manner are actually implemented. following this recommendation ind officials notified the rapporteur among other things that they would in vestigate the possibility of compiling a security file containing all the available information relating to any security aspects affecting the individual concerned and his or her family. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm p. . nrm recommendation . see also . national action plan on human trafficking action point nrm p. . appendix to parliamentary documents ii no. pp. . nrm recommendation . recommendations and developments . supervision enforcement and investigation in the sex industry . . supervision and enforcement abolition of national ban on brothels with the reasoning that voluntary prostitution is a fact of life in society and therefore calls for a realistic approach and the objective of decriminalising the exploitation of prostitution the national ban on brothels article bis of the dutch criminal code and the criminalisation of pimping article of the dutch criminal code were abolished in . the expectation was that licensed prostitution could be properly monitored and that the police should focus their attention mainly on illegal prostitution. consequently one of the rapporteur s very first recommendations concerning supervision and enfor cement was concerned with prostitution outside the licensed sector. the rapporteur said that to tackle abuses in prostitution outside the legal sector a lot depended on the efforts of the police and the public prosecution service which should focus more directly on active and alert investigation and prosecu tion of cases of human trafficking. in the fifth report the rapporteur called above all for more intensive checks by the police in the illegal prostitution sector and for a clear and consistent approach to repressive enforcement in the licensed sector by municipalities. the licensing requirement and the measures to clean up the prostitution sector following the abo lition of the ban on brothels have been evaluated twice. the second evaluation indicated that in addition to licensed establishments and forms of prostitution that did not require a license there was non licensed illegal prostitution. however the evaluation concluded that the legal prostitu tion sector was larger than the illegal sector. another conclusion was that in the licensing system was working properly almost everywhere and that everywhere controls were carried out to one extent or another so that there were scarcely any so called sanctuaries any longer. that seemed to indicate that the licence prostitution sector was being properly controlled. this conclusion did not accurately reflect the true situation as was shown by the sneep case for example in which more than women working in the licensed sector were found to have been for ced into prostitution and also became apparent from the administrative report following that case. supervision of the licensed sector therefore remained an area of concern. municipalities when the ban on brothels was lifted it was decided to opt for local regulation of legal forms of exploi tation of prostitution. the advantage of this approach was that municipalities could adopt their own policies in response to the local situation. however there were also drawbacks. the rapporteur has made a number of recommendations in relation to this issue in the last years. a number of the recommendations made in this context were aimed at harmonising municipal policy and improving the exchange of information between municipalities and other partners in the anti trafficking chain. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . daalder p. . daalder p. . hout and van der laan . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring harmonisation of policy a national framework is needed to prevent waterbed effects. in this context the rapporteur recom mended that the central government should assume responsibility for prostitution policy. this recommendation was not adopted primary responsibility for prostitution policy has remained with the local authorities in recent years. in the fifth report the rapporteur recommended that every municipality should require escort agencies to have a licence and should adopt a general munici pal bye law requiring them to have a permanent address with a permanent telephone number as a condition for receiving a licence. in this way escort companies would be subject to the same rules everywhere. although the proposal for the act on the regulation of prostitution see . . will create more uniformity in licensing conditions it still leaves scope for differences. according to the bill municipalities will have the possibility to opt for zero tolerance under certain conditions me aning that municipalities can adopt bye laws providing that no licences will be issued for prostitution businesses in the interests of protecting public order the quality of life and the safety and health of prostitutes and clients. sharing information to prevent the waterbed effect the third report also called for an enquiry into the extent to which administrative measures taken against a mala fide operator in one municipality could be used in assessing an application for a licence by the same operator in another municipality. the rapporteur recommen ded that overviews of the results of administrative checks and any ensuing administrative interventions should be distributed nationally so that municipalities would have a single source of information about the status of a business. another recommendation was that municipalities should improve the provision of relevant informa tion to the police and the public prosecution service and vice versa. the rapporteur suggested that the regional information and expertise centres riecs could help in this by serving as hubs for the distribution of information and as centres of expertise for all the relevant partners. the task force on human trafficking also devoted attention to improving the exchange of informa tion at local and national level in its action plan. the progress report on the action plan showed that a nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . see www.riecnet.nl consulted on august and nrm pp. . the centres of expertise should operate at a supra regional level in order to prevent waterbed effects and to collect and distribute information at the national level. at the same time the centres of exper tise should respond adequately to regional needs. to optimise the match with the regional require ments it was decided not to prescribe a uniform embedding model but to allow the riecs to decide on their own structure. there will be a review at the end of the pilot phase to assess whether a uniform structure is required after all source administrative approach to organised crime programme ap pendix to parliamentary documents ii no. pp. information receive verbally from the project manager of the administrative approach to organised crime programme april . task force on human trafficking a measure . recommendations and developments number of quick wins had been achieved in relation to the exchange of information. for example a tool kit entitled the guide to chain direction and administrative supervision in the licensed prostitution sector had been produced for agencies involved in controlling investigating and prosecuting human trafficking and providing shelter for victims. the tool kit contained instructions on how to record indi cations of human trafficking and on the conditions under which information can be shared with other agencies. the national police intelligence service ipol of the national police services agency klpd had also conducted a study into the bottlenecks in the exchange of information between the police service s centre of expertise on human trafficking and migrant smuggling emm the regional police forces and the royal netherlands marechaussee. the results of that study were not entirely positive with regard to the sharing of information by these agencies and the role of the emm. in a speech to a conference entitled the approach of municipalities to human trafficking on february the rapporteur urged partners in the chain to cooperate and stressed that municipalities have a primary task in efforts to combat human trafficking. the action plan also reported that a pilot project designed to link the riecs and the emm had started. the aim of this project is to improve the exchange of information and explore how the various parties in the chain can share the information they have and when they are permitted to do so. during the project the parties will also experiment with producing administrative reports and improving their professionalism. supervising the escort sector supervision of the escort sector is complex because it is not bound to a specific location. operators of businesses and prostitutes can quickly move from one municipality to another. their elusiveness is reinforced by flexible means of communication which can sometimes make it difficult to identify the individuals behind a business. since the first report the rapporteur has warned of the difficulty of identifying human trafficking in the escort sector. the exclusion of the sector from the licensing system means that no administrative control can be exercised over it. accordingly the rapporteur has expressed concern about the pos sibility of the banned variants of the exploitation of prostitution becoming rooted in this sector. in the third report the rapporteur said that attempts were being made as part of the handhaven op niveau project to develop an effective system of enforcement and sanctions for the escort sector. as part of that effort the hotel room procedure also known as supervision via appointment was developed. this method involves making an appointment with a prostitute from an escort agency in order to check whether the agency s manager is complying with the terms of the licence. the third report said that if the instrument of administrative control was not effective enough in this sector or placed extreme demands on available capacity a simpler system of regulation and control should be task force on human trafficking b. hendriks and corsel . nrm p. . conference on prostitution policy organised by the municipality of the hague in association with the hague prostitution platform and management consultancy de beuk february . proceedings wat weten we wat willen we wat doen we available online at www.prostitutiebeleid .nl. nrm recommendation . nrm . . . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring considered. one of the recommendations in the fifth report was that all municipalities should require escort companies to be licensed. it also included a recommendation to investigate how effective supervision could be exercised over sex businesses where both paid and unpaid sex occurs such as couples clubs. the fifth and seventh reports also called for control of non location bound prostitution by developing new methods and hiring experts in electronic media because of the growing importance of the internet and the need to monitor sites where prostitutes advertise their services . although the rapporteur was positive about the impact of the hotel procedure in the fifth report in the seventh report she noted that its impact was weakening because operators had become familiar with the procedure and could therefore easily evade it. under the proposal for the act on the regulation of prostitution escort businesses would like all sex businesses be required to have a licence. insofar as the introduction of the act would make the supervi sion and control of the escort sector more effective it would also implement some of the rapporteur s recommendations. cooperation in the chain a chain approach is an approach that makes use of the powers and instruments available to different partners. in the context of combating human trafficking a chain approach combines prevention iden tification the provision of help investigation and prosecution. in municipalities had not yet all adopted a chain approach. part of the reason for this was that not all municipalities perceived human trafficking as a problem. in the seventh report the rapporteur recommended that municipalities should take the initiative to adopt a chain approach towards human trafficking under the direction of a specific official suggesting that smaller municipalities could cooperate with larger municipalities if necessary. there was already good cooperation in the chain in some large cities. one example is the city of rotterdam where parties signed an agreement on february to adopt a chain approach to human trafficking. the partners agreed to intensify cooperation and share information about every aspect of the criminal in vestigation of human trafficking. the municipality of rotterdam is one of the partners and the chain director is from that municipality. the electronic exchange of data and the creation of files have been nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . it is recommended that every municipality should impose a licensing re quirement on escort businesses and make it a condition of granting a licence in the general municipal ordinance that escort businesses must have a fixed address with a fixed telephone number where they keep their day to day records including staffing records. nrm recommendation an instrument that could be helpful in this respect is a multimedia agreement analogous to the agree ment on erotic advertisements obliging sex businesses to report their licence number and place of establishment in the advertisement. however this instrument is only useful if the information is veri fied. another option might be to require these sex businesses to have a permanent telephone number. nrm p. . nrm recommendation . recommendations and developments intensified to improve efforts criminal fiscal and administrative to catch perpetrators. the agreement also covers the provision of care and shelter for victims of human trafficking. following on from these measures the rapporteur also called for the adoption of a comprehensive approach particularly with a view to ensuring the effectiveness of measures to tackle human trafficking in the sex industry. such an approach would no longer be confined to tightening up scrutiny of the licensed prostitution sector for human trafficking for example by devoting time to building up a rela tionship of trust with the prostitutes working in the sector and through persistent questioning in the event of indications of human trafficking but would also simultaneously address illegal prostitution. another element of such an approach would be clear agreements on the allocation of tasks between the police and the municipalities. the police the police monitor describes the efforts made by the different police forces to combat human trafficking and the methods and degree of cooperation of cooperation between the various forces and the other partners in the chain. the monitor is written by the police and contains a degree of self reflection that few other partners in the chain have imitated to date. the police monitor showed that the police had still not adequately controlled the licensed prostitution sector in . the monitor also showed that supervising the non licensed sector made huge demands on resources and that most forces had only carried out occasional or reactive checks. following the publication of the police monitor the holder of the portfolio for human trafficking migrant smuggling and other forms of exploitation for the police informed the minister of justice of the improvements the police intended to make in response to the monitor to improve efforts to combat human trafficking. he informed the minister that the police monitor which is due to appear in april would incorporate the results of the planned improvements. . . investigation in the first report the rapporteur said that investigations of human trafficking should not rely solely on information from a victim s report. the threshold for making a statement or report the crime is often very high for a victim. information should be gathered far more widely. a more information led investigation would be helpful as would information from other investigations. the agreement was signed by the rotterdam rijnmond police region the rotterdam district office of the public prosecution service the tax authorities in rijnmond the prostitution social work depart ment of stichting humanitas the ministry of social affairs and employment the social intelligence and investigation service and the labour inspectorate the central agency for the reception of asylum seekers the child care agency the probation service and the municipality of rotterdam the urban development and housing department the municipal health service the public affairs department the social affairs and employment department and the security department . nrm recommendation . police monitor the monitor was published in and contained information about . nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring financial investigations financial investigations are one way of preventing investigations from relying too much on statements by victims. financial investigations make optimal use of know how and the methods and techniques of conducting financial economic and administrative enquiries.nrm these investigations can help the authorities to discover the origin and destination of illegally earned income and to gather evidence. at the same time they can reveal links between members of a criminal network and might identify as sets that can be confiscated. since the first report the rapporteur has been highlighting the need for investigations into money flows the confiscation of illegal earnings and for financial investigations in general and drew at tention to the issue again in the third and fifth reports. in the fifth report the rapporteur also mentioned the importance of financial investigations for identifying facilitators international criminal organisations and their contacts in the legitimate business world. the seventh report mentioned that financial investigations are almost always conducted in human trafficking cases. programmatic approach this is an approach used to tackle organised crime. human trafficking is one of the areas where the ap proach is being developed in pilot projects which also address new manifestations of exploitation in the sex industry such as forced prostitution in hotels. one of the features of the programmatic approach is that it involves a joint effort by the criminal and administrative authorities at local and national level. the aim of this broad cooperation at different levels is not only to prosecute perpetrators and conscious facilitators but also to identify underlying ad hoc structures and structural factors that consciously or otherwise facilitate organised crime. this is done using the so called barrier model which describes the obstacles that organised criminal organisations have to overcome to commit a criminal offence. the five barriers are entry housing identity work and finance. the action plan of the task force on human trafficking said that the barrier model was used in all pilot projects relating to human trafficking in . the programmatic approach was used for the first time on an experimental basis in the sneep investigation in . to involve the chain partners in the case the public prosecution service and the police gave presentations and media briefings about the scale and the violent nature of this human trafficking gang which had been able to operate freely for years. the approach worked almost all of the partners became convinced that it was a serious social problem and expressed a willingness to help combat it. the police monitor reflected on the financial investigations conducted by the police. it said that at least one section of a case file should be devoted to the financial aspects of the case. secherling and nelen p. . at a later stage financial investigations are also relevant for claims for compensation by victims. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . programme to strengthen the approach to combating organised crime appendix to parliamentary documents no. pp. . see also nrm pp. . mensenhandel onverminderd hoge prioriteit public prosecution service annual report p. task force on human trafficking b p. recommendations and developments . . police capacity the rapporteur has repeatedly recommended making more resources available to investigate human trafficking. without additional capacity the efforts to combat human trafficking as one of the many designated priorities could not receive sufficient attention and resources. the government had earlier said that the police should intensify efforts to investigate and combat human trafficking. that could only be done with the allocation of additional resources. the police originally assigned human trafficking to their vice and juvenile crime teams. since comba ting human trafficking requires specialist know how the rapporteur called early on for the creation of dedicated human trafficking teams. in the seventh report the rapporteur highlighted the need for every force to adopt the police s own reference framework on human trafficking which lays down standards for investigation and enforcement. she also recommended that every police force should have a specialist human trafficking team. in some of the regional police forces had specialist human trafficking teams. the police monitor said that many forces had measures in place to guarantee efforts to investigate and combat human trafficking nevertheless it described as problematic the fact that forces did not all possess or deploy the same level of resources to carry out all the tasks relating to human trafficking. the police monitor also said that there was a gap between the reality on paper and what happened in practice although human trafficking was a priority for almost every force in practice other not unimportant matters often received priority. on the basis of the public prosecution service s annual report for the chairman of the council of procurators general commented the available information must lead to the conclusion that a lot of cases are shelved by detectives. it is not possible for the investigative services and the public prosecution service to deal with all criminal offences and their perpetrators with the available manpower and resour ces. the report showed that the criminal intelligence divisions in particular already faced a shortage of detectives to investigate and prosecute every known or suspected crime. this is especially a problem in the case of complex investigations of offences such as child pornography and organised crime including human trafficking according to the same article. the police monitor further reported that the police were not always compensated for the work they performed for municipalities. several regional forces had received additional resources in the form of financing from municipalities for one or more ftes but according to the police monitor the police desperately needed additional capacity to achieve the goals that were set. securing additional capacity depended it was suggested on the importance municipalities attach to tackling human trafficking. in a reaction to the draft act on the regulation of prostitution the rapporteur referred to the fact that it did not make any provision for expanding capacity adding that the proposal also said nothing about nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation the priority the police give to human trafficking at the policy level must also be reflected in practice by all regional forces. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . police monitor pp. . baas om waarschuwt voor afname veiligheid de pers thursday may . see also . . . police monitor p. . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring the allocation of tasks between the local authority and the police. if nothing is agreed it is likely that checking licences will be mainly a task for the police with the ensuing risk that the police will become overburdened. the memorandum of amendment to the law later included a provision that supervi sion would be carried out by officials designated by the municipality and not by police officers. the activities of human traffickers are not confined to a particular region. investigations and measures to combat human trafficking must therefore also transcend regional boundaries. accordingly in the first report the rapporteur specifically called for the creation of capacity to address human trafficking at the national level. this recommendation has become even more urgent particularly as a result of changes in the non location bound prostitution sector. in the seventh report the rapporteur also referred to the problems that polices force can face with the shopping around of human trafficking investigations and recommended measures to prevent this. the rapporteur has also made repeated calls for international cooperation. . . prohibiting the tolerance of human trafficking in april the national office of the public prosecution service and the national criminal intel ligence service launched the investigation codenamed sneep. in this investigation a number of investigative agencies targeted a group of human traffickers who were operating at various loca tions in the netherlands. for years the group had been violently exploiting more than women in window prostitution. a number of agencies professionally involved in identifying and combating human trafficking had been aware of the group for years. after a warning to the police at the beursstraat station in am sterdam in investigations had taken place in and but they had not ended the group s criminal activities. further complaints were made in and by victims and by as sociates or competitors of the group. the first arrests were made in february . the sneep case see above in . . demonstrated that victims had remained in a situation of exploita tion without any direct intervention despite the fact that tolerance of human trafficking is absolutely forbidden meaning that if human trafficking is suspected the police and the public prosecution ser vice may never allow an offence to continue if that prevents victims being removed from their situation . input of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings for the roundtable discussion of the act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry letter from the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings to the members of parliament s permanent committee for the interior and kingdom relations and permanent committee for justice december p. . parliamentary documents ii no. . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . hout and van der laan p. . hout and van der laan p. . parliament adopted the rouvoet motion on tolerating known offences in november . it encom passed a total ban on allowing offences to continue in other words it is not even acceptable in the interests of a major investigation. rouvoet motion parliamentary documents ii no. . recommendations and developments even the interests of a major investigation such as efforts to identify and arrest the leaders of a criminal organisation and to discover how they operate does not remove that obligation. the recommendation in the first report to conduct a new and broader review of the scope and impact of the rouvoet motion for the legal practice was repeated in the third and fifth reports. in the se venth report the rapporteur warned of the risk that the police would increasingly face the dilemma of being aware of offences but being unable to intervene in a human trafficking situation because of a lack of capacity notwithstanding the fact that the ban on tolerating human trafficking situations is intended to protect victims from that. although the ban prescribes that every indication of human trafficking must be immediately investigated in practice a human trafficking case might be set aside by the case review committee for example in favour of other priority cases serious vice cases or major drug cases for example or it might take some time to start an investigation. consequently the absolute ban does not always seem to be applied in practice. the recommendation in the first report has therefore lost none of its relevance. . training awareness and identification . . introduction it is usually not easy to identify human trafficking. possible victims of human trafficking often do not clearly convey the message that they are victims. situations of human trafficking are not always easy to recognise. hence the growing importance that many organisations the police in particular attach to recognising situations of human trafficking. the most important factor in identifying human trafficking is to know the signs. training is provided to professionals to help improve their ability to identify those signs. the general public can also play an im portant role in identifying human trafficking. accordingly the rapporteur has made numerous recom mendations concerning training for professionals and to increase public awareness of the phenomenon. . . training of professionals because it is so important for the various partners in the anti trafficking chain to have sufficient know ledge of how to combat human trafficking the rapporteur s reports have included recommendations for training and education in relation to human trafficking for various target groups. most of those recommendations were intended to equip professionals to recognise and respond adequately to indi cations of human trafficking. the national action plan on human trafficking nap also addressed the van gestel and verhoeven . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm p. . nrm p. . for the seventh report the rapporteur conducted research into shelved cases partly because the existence of such cases is totally inconsistent with the priority given to human trafficking by the government the police and the public prosecution service as well as the ban on tolerating human trafficking. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring issue of the recognition of indications of human trafficking by professionals and the training in the relevant agencies. identification there are numerous signs that can indicate human trafficking. briefly they can include multiple depen dency on another person the employer serious restriction of an individual s basic freedoms very poor working conditions and violation of a person s physical integrity. employees of organisations that might be confronted with victims of human trafficking should ideally be aware of these indications and know where they should report relevant information. but that has not always been the case. in the first report the rapporteur referred to the possibility of a more consistent effective and proactive approach to searching for signs of human trafficking and responding to them. efforts to tackle human trafficking had to start with a mind open to the signs of human trafficking and any indications should in any case lead to an investigation and if possible a prosecution. at the time the recommendation applied only to human trafficking with a view to sexual exploitation. in exploitation outside the sex industry other forms of exploitation also became a criminal offence and efforts to identify exploitation had to be expanded accordingly since without identification of these forms of exploitation there was less chance that the offence would actually be prosecuted. the third report therefore recommended drawing up a list of indications of other forms of exploitation using the existing list of signs of human trafficking for sexual exploitation as a guideline. in the fifth report the rapporteur advised relevant organisations to be attentive for signs of human trafficking particularly where it might involve vulnerable groups such as children living illegally in the netherlands and persons with a mild mental handicap. another recommendation was to involve orga nisations that worked with vulnerable children in efforts to identify and provide assistance for underage victims without a residence permit including helping them to report crimes. one suggestion was to formulate and disseminate a standard procedure for protecting those vulnerable groups. the same report referred to the progress made in identifying and providing assistance to possible victims of human trafficking in aliens detention. the report said that this issue should continue to receive at tention but added the important recommendation of being particularly alert for male victims of human trafficking in aliens detention. in the seventh report the rapporteur remarked that the identification of other forms of exploitation by all the relevant agencies needed to improve . the labour inspectorate in the workplace the social intelligence and investigation service siod in the workplace the police and royal netherlands ma rechaussee when aliens are arrested the immigration and naturalisation service during the asylum for example see action point in the national action plan on human trafficking distribute a list of possible indications of human trafficking widely among agencies that may come into contact with victims of human trafficking. include the subject of human trafficking in the training programmes of these agencies where possible. for an extensive list see the instructions on human trafficking of the public prosecution service government gazette appendix . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . recommendations and developments procedure and the repatriation departure service during aliens detention in particular could be expected to be proactive in questioning possible victims and otherwise searching for signs of human trafficking. identification of victims who are also offenders in the seventh report the rapporteur called on the child protection council and youth care services to be alert to signs of human trafficking for example with regard to possible victims of lover boys and to victims among roma children and in making recommendations on sentencing of underage victims as offenders. this last recommendation arose from bnrm s study into the non punishment principle. this study explored the problems of victims of human trafficking who have themselves committed a criminal offence in connection with the situation of exploita tion. because they are also offenders these persons are not always recognised as victims. nor are the agencies that deal with these victims primarily concerned with recognising signs that a person may be a victim of human trafficking. the fact that victims can also be offenders complicates the task of recognising the signs. besides identification another recurring objective of the recommendations that have been made has been to have the treatment of victims included in the training of professionals. other recommen dations have been concerned with ensuring that agencies keep their know how up to date and with promoting awareness within organisations of the tasks and duties of their partners in the chain. the nap also addresses the need to embed information about the operating methods and profiles of lover boys in the training of police and public prosecutors. a noteworthy point in the nap s action list on training is that it repeatedly mentions that training courses should devote special attention to human trafficking in children. training of police the police are often the first to come in contact with victims of human trafficking as well as being the agency that generally investigates cases of human trafficking. it is therefore crucial for the police to have a thorough knowledge of the offence of the procedures for investigating it and of how victims should be treated. a logical conclusion is that investigating officers should be given training in how to deal with human trafficking. even before the publication of the first report human trafficking was covered in a training course provided in some police regions. the aim of the course was to train investigating officers in how to give evidence before a court and used a human trafficking case as a model.nrm since the training programme for detectives has included a specific module on human trafficking nrm which is broader and includes sections on conducting intake interviews recording reports and interviewing witnesses carrying out checks and document verification. although the original courses for the police were mainly concerned with sexual exploitation a course in migration related crime was developed for the aliens police in . one of the aims of this course is to enable participants to recognise and deal adequately with cases of other forms of exploitation and the victims. it is noteworthy that the subject of nrm recommendation . nrm chapter . nrm recommendation . national action plan on human trafficking action point . national action plan on human trafficking action points and . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring other forms of exploitation is included in the course on migration related crime since other forms of exploitation are not by their nature or manifestation necessarily related to migration. of the cases involving other forms of exploitation brought before the courts between january and june six involved only dutch victims and therefore no element of migration. certification the instructions on human trafficking issued by the council of procurators general state that vic tims must be interviewed by competent officers who have been trained in interviewing victims of human trafficking. the instructions on human trafficking also state that officers who interview victims of forced prostitution and victims of other forms of exploitation should preferably also be certified. a problem that arises from these instructions is that some police forces but also other partners in the chain such as the royal netherlands marechaussee and the siod have a shortage of qualified personnel. consequently certified officers are not always immediately available and conse quently victims of human trafficking cannot always be interviewed immediately. public prosecution service and the judiciary there have been repeated calls in international documents for training for all officials and individuals involved in tackling human trafficking. accordingly in the third report the rapporteur highlighted the need for officials to possess an adequate level of knowledge and to refresh it regularly. the rapporteur recommended establishing a permanent structure for training and education for both the public pro secution service and the judiciary. the judiciary in particular should devote more attention to deve loping knowledge and expertise on the subject of human trafficking according to the fifth report. in the fifth report the rapporteur also recommended an evaluation of whether human trafficking should be an area of specialisation within the judiciary arguing that specialisation in human traf ficking cases and concentrating cases with particular judges would certainly improve the quality of the administration of justice. after all human trafficking is a complex offence and knowledge and expertise in the field needs to be consolidated and safeguarded. the findings from the study of the case law in the seventh report then led to the recommendation that there should also be judges that specialise in human trafficking and that given the annual number of cases ways should be found of retaining the accumulated expertise. this condition was included in the instructions on human trafficking government gazette and was left unchanged in the instructions on human trafficking government gazette . this element was also included in the instructions on human trafficking government gazette and has remained unchanged in the instructions on human trafficking. see nrm pp. and . nrm recommendation . the public prosecution service had already been providing a one off course for public prosecutors and their support staff since . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . it emerged for example that the district offices in assen dordrecht and middelburg registered the smallest number of cases between and . these three office each accounted for just of cases and like maastricht and zutphen never appeared in the top five district over the nine year period see . . . recommendations and developments one of the measures in the action plan of the task force on human trafficking relates to increasing the knowledge and expertise of the public prosecution service and of the judiciary. in its response to the recommendations in the seventh report the government said that this measure had already led to the inclusion of a basic and an advanced course on human trafficking in the programme of the study centre for the judiciary ssr in and that this programme was open to both prosecutors and judges. this is an advanced version of an existing course on human trafficking. according to the rapporteur a course embracing the entire spectrum of human trafficking should be developed for the public prosecution service and the judiciary which should also include what the ssr refers to as professional meetings. although the ssr s courses are also open to judges the rapporteur observed that judges only participa ted in them occasionally.nrm only two judges attended the ssr course on human trafficking in . the participation by members of the judiciary in courses on human trafficking therefore remains a point of concern. there was a slight increase in the number of judges participating in the ssr courses in . several courts have also given short internal courses on human trafficking. in its reaction to the seventh report the government said that the judiciary had not yet taken any steps to make human trafficking an area of specialisation. the minister felt however that specialist judges ought to be assigned to human trafficking. the public prosecution service has already taken a number of measures to increase its knowledge and expertise. they are set out in strengthening the approach to combating human trafficking and migrant smugglingnrm and include treating human trafficking as an area of specialisation in regional offices and the adopting a system of certification. european database with case law on human trafficking another potentially useful tool for legal practitioners might be a systematic method of searching for relevant case law. caselex is an electronic database of judicial decisions in various areas of law connec ted with european legislation directives treaties and international agreements . it contains selected judgments of both the highest national courts and the european court of justice. at the moment the database contains no criminal case law and therefore no judgments on human trafficking. the rap porteur supports the idea of creating a database of case law on human trafficking within the existing caselex system which would allow judges public prosecution services police lawyers policy makers and other professional legal groups to find relevant jurisprudence from other countries. after all nati onal legislation and case law on human trafficking is based on the same international sources such as the un palermo protocol the eu framework decision on trafficking in human beings and the council of europe s convention on action against trafficking in human beings . task force on human trafficking b measure . letter from the minister of justice reaction to the seventh report of the national rapporteur on traf ficking in human beings january parliamentary documents ii . no. . nrm recommendation . memorandum on human trafficking by the judiciary submitted for information purposes to the mee ting of the task force in may . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring siod and the labour inspectorate other agencies that provide training on human trafficking are the social intelligence and investigation service siod and the labour inspectorate. the courses are designed to help officials of these agencies to identify other forms of exploitation. in april the siod started a new course on human traffic king for siod investigators a specialist from the labour inspectorate and an employee of comensha. the course was developed in association with the international centre for migration policy development icmpd with a view to enhancing the skills of officials of the siod and labour inspectorate in iden tifying and dealing with potential victims of human trafficking. at the time of writing it was not known whether this course would be certified. training for the entire chain whereas in earlier reports the rapporteur s recommendations were concerned exclusively with training for specific target groups the seventh report also drew attention to the need for training across the en tire anti trafficking chain. the rapporteur recommended for example that employees of every agency that could be confronted with other forms of exploitation should receive training in how to recognise signs of human trafficking and how to deal with victims. the report also mentioned the importance of repeating the courses and giving them for new employees. for the first time this report also recom mended organising joint training courses for different agencies. another recommendation relating to the entire chain in the seventh report was recommendation which called for permanent attention for the problem of victims of human trafficking who are also sus pects the non punishment principle for example by including the subject in the courses and training provided for all of the partners in the chain. in its reaction to the seventh report the government said that the public prosecution service will evaluate the scope for improvement in the application of the non punishment principle for example by formulating additional rules for the application of the prin ciple and incorporating them in the instructions on human trafficking and in the training the internal work processes and the cooperation between partners. . . public awareness it is not only professionals who are involved in combating human trafficking in the course of their work that play a role in preventing this offence. the public can also play an important role in preventing identifying and combating human trafficking. the general public is still not fully aware of the nature and manifestations of human trafficking. although human trafficking forced prostitution and loverboys are all familiar terms partly because of media attention for many people human trafficking is still a very remote concept and something they believe could not occur in their circles. there are also miscon for more information about courses followed by officials of the labour inspectorate and the siod see nrm pp. . information received in writing from the siod march . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . a specific recommendation was that joint training for the labour inspec torate and the aliens police could help to increase their awareness of each other s powers and duties and of their respective roles when potential victims of forms of exploitation outside the sex industry are discovered. for a detailed description of this problem see nrm chapter . parliamentary documents ii no. p. . recommendations and developments ceptions about the distinction between human trafficking and migrant smuggling and the notion of exploitation outside the sex industry is still unknown to many people. human trafficking can openly occur because many people do not know precisely what human trafficking encompasses and how it can be recognised. it is therefore vital to increase public awareness of the offence in order to tackle human trafficking more effectively. public awareness and the role of the media although bnrm has not researched the scale of media attention to human trafficking it seems that reporting on it has increased in recent years. major human trafficking cases such as sneep and koolvis in particular but also the charges of exploitation of workers on an asparagus farm in someren in have been widely covered in the press. the extensive reporting of these cases has contributed to wider public awareness of human trafficking. that the media reporting has not been confined to background information is apparent from the enormous media attention for the flight of the convicted human trafficker saban b. in september . the commotion that arose after a television programme by investigative reporter peter r. de vries and the publication of the book echte mannen eten w l kaas calling into question the truthfulness of the autobiography by maria mosterd also highlighted the media and public interest in the subject of human trafficking. although organising public awareness campaigns on human trafficking is not a core task or responsibi lity of the rapporteur she does help to increase public awareness of the problem by giving lectures and media interviews. an exception is also being made this year when to mark the th anniversary of the establishment of the post of national rapporteur bnrm will put on the exhibition called journey in the hague. the exhibition is a vehicle to create and increase awareness of human trafficking. journey will be exhibited on the plein in the hague from october . the exhibition gives the general public a unique opportunity to learn about the nature and impact of human trafficking. the exhibition will also reach a wider target group including people who have no professional or personal involvement in tackling human trafficking. within that group there are potential victims of loverboys for example potential young offenders as well as consumers clients of prostitutes employers and the criminal offence of people smuggling article a of the dutch criminal code involves assis ting for motives of pecuniary or other gain another person in gaining entry to the netherlands or in remaining in the netherlands. this is an offence against the territorial integrity of a state and that is the central interest. by contrast with people smuggling the use of coercion and the intention of exploita tion are in principle necessary to meet the terms of the definition of human trafficking article f of the dutch criminal code . human trafficking is by definition and in essence a serious violation of the human rights and the personal integrity of the trafficked person which is not the case with people smuggling. these cases are discussed at length in nrm . for example see mensenhandelaar saban b. is spoorloos nrc handelsblad september and saban b. ontsnapte doordat rechters slapen trouw september . sbs peter r. de vries misdaadverslaggever may . korterink . mosterd . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring other professionals who consciously or unconsciously come in contact with human trafficking. it is hoped that reaching this group will enhance efforts to identify and prevent human trafficking. journey tells the story of a victim in a way that allows visitors to see and experience it for themselves. the exhibition is made up of seven sea containers with exhibits that tell the story of a victim of sexual exploitation. each container has been designed by a different artist and portrays one specific aspect of the victim s experience. together they represent the seven stages of the victim s story. as they walk through the containers visitors can experience for themselves the problems associa ted with human trafficking. media coverage will expand the reach of the exhibition throughout the netherlands and so enable journey to provide spin offs for wider public awareness. journey tells the unique story of one victim who was enticed to the uk under false pretences where she was then exploited in prostitution under compulsion. the exhibition is intended to spark a general discussion of human trafficking including the plight of victims who know in advance that they will be working in prostitution but who are then still exploited. journey will also provide spin off in the form of information designed to create wider public awareness of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. recommendations on public awareness over the years the rapporteur has made a number of recommendations for increasing public awareness. in the very first report the rapporteur called for a public awareness campaign on human trafficking. the recommendation in the first report was only concerned with exploitation in the sex industry since other forms of exploitation were not yet criminal offences at the time the report was published. . in the third report the emphasis in the recommendation concerning information for the general public shifted to wards other forms of exploitation. in addition to repeating the recommendation made in the first report about starting a publicity campaign on sexual exploitation the recommendation said apart from that the central government has a responsibility to provide information to the public since the message that has to be conveyed is not specific to a particular branch but is that exploitation and abuse of people cannot be tolerated. with the pending expansion of the human trafficking article whereby human trafficking will no longer be solely related to the sex industry this importance is more pronounced. the government must accept responsibility and act accordingly. in the fifth report this recommendation was repeated in more specific terms and finally the seventh report contained a recommendation for a permanent campaign to increase public awareness of other forms of exploitation. the conclusion to be drawn from this is that the rapporteur s recommendations for increasing aware ness of sexual and other forms of exploitation evolved in anticipation of the expansion of the criminal offence of human trafficking to include other forms of exploitation. this development is also reflected in the national action plan on human trafficking and the supplementary measures to it. the original nap only proposed providing information specifically for clients of prostitutes. in the supplementary these stages are hope journey uniform bedroom customer stigma resurrection. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation nrm recommendation . national action plan on human trafficking action point . recommendations and developments measures to the nap this action point was extended to include providing information for actors on the demand side of other sectors as well. although other forms of exploitation have been criminalised since january in her most recent report the rapporteur observed that other forms of exploitation are perceived different from sexual exploitation. other forms of exploitation are still often regarded as a less serious form of exploitation than sexual exploitation. this difference in perception leads to the conclusion that more needs to be done to increase awareness about other forms of exploitation. ministry of social affairs and employment campaign to publicise exploitation at work in mid the ministry of social affairs and employment launched a campaign to warn possible victims of exploitation at work. the campaign will run until the end of . advertisements about other forms of exploitation are placed in trade journals for sectors outside the sex industry in which there is a heightened risk of exploitation such as the agriculture and horticulture sector or the hospitality industry . the ministry also posts banners on websites that are visited by the target groups. at the time of writing there are also plans to publish articles in newspapers on the subject of exploitation. the aim of the campaign is to disseminate information about exploitation and suggest actions that people who identify exploitation can take. comensha e card action in the autumn of comensha launched the campaign denk eens na over uitbuiting over a period of a month comensha sent e cards on other forms of exploitation to all the partners in the chain members of the upper and lower houses of parliament newspapers and magazines. it followed this up by publishing articles on other forms of exploitation in various newspapers and magazines. in view of its success the campaign will be repeated in the autumn of . in addition to the recommendations for raising general public awareness a number of recommenda tions made a distinction between specific target groups such as clients operators neighbours passers by and potential victims. whereas the recommendations on raising awareness in the first and third reports were directed mainly at actors in the sex industry the fifth and seventh reports also included recommendations targeted at individuals outside the sex industry. for example the fifth report inclu ded the recommendation that individuals who employ people for domestic work should be informed about the minimum standards under labour law and about human trafficking with a view to labour exploitation. the seventh report included the recommendation that domestic workers in the service supplementary measures to the national action plan on human trafficking parliamentary documents ii no. pp. and . nrm . identification and perception. information received verbally and in writing from the ministry of social affairs and employment april and may . the ministry of social affairs and employment defines exploitation at work as exploitation in the sec tors supervised by the ministry s investigative and inspection services. this definition largely corres ponds with bnrm s own definition of other forms of exploitation. see comensha s website at www.comensha.nl consulted on august and information received verbally from comensha on june . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring of diplomats should be informed of their rights. at the time of writing the ministry of foreign af fairs is formulating a new policy on the information to be provided to domestic workers employed by diplomats. another target group specifically addressed in the fifth report were aliens who are living legally in the netherlands including asylum seekers migrants with a residence permit that is dependent on a partner and au pairs. because members of this group may be vulnerable to exploitation the rapporteur recom mended investigating how the government can inform these people about their legal position and how they can be given an opportunity to make enquiries or report work related abuses. a practical follow up to this recommendation is exploitation at the workplace a fact sheet published by the ministry of social affairs and employment at the beginning of . intended for victims and their acquaintances this leaflet contains information about signs of exploitation outside the sex industry and explains the rights of victims. the fact sheet has been published in languages and distributed to ngos social services municipalities and police forces. awareness among clients a special effort has been made to raise awareness among clients of prostitutes. the rapporteur has made a number of recommendations designed to increase awareness among members of this target group. the nap was also mindful of this group. the rapporteur s first report called for the establishment of a reporting centre where people could notify their suspicions of human trafficking. the nap also recommended that specific information should be provided to potential or existing clients of prostitutes about how to identify and report human traf ficking and its victims. on january the ministry of justice launched a publicity campaign called schijn bedriegt. the aim of the campaign was to help clients of prostitutes and others directly or indirectly involved in the sex industry to recognise signs of coerced prostitution and report suspicious situations to the police or anonymously to stichting m. a foundation established to receive anonymous tips . the schijn bedriegt campaign was repeated in . in the autumn of the municipality of amsterdam will launch its own schijn bedriegt campaign targeting clients of prostitutes with catchy banners on erotic websites and calling on them to report abuses involving forced prostitution anonymously or otherwise. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . for more information about the fact sheet see nrm p. . parliamentary documents ii no. pp. . national action plan on human trafficking action point . nrm p. . meld misdaad anoniem. opinions differ about the use and results of such an awareness raising campaign targeted at clients. for a brief discussion see nrm pp. . information received verbally from stichting m. may . at the time of writing the campaign was due to start in september . similar banners were used in earlier schijn bedriegt campaigns. they were very effective according to stichting m. information received verbally from stichting m. may . recommendations and developments an additional feature of the campaign is that a flyer will be published for clients and prostitutes. the flyer will contain mainly illustrations in an attempt by using as little text as possible to reach a larger international target group. another new element in the amsterdam campaign is that stichting m. the municipality of amsterdam the police and other chain partners will organise a workshop for social workers care workers and ngo s concerned with human trafficking and prostitution. in the first report the rapporteur recommended a channelling discouragement policy aimed at discouraging clients from using legally prohibited forms of prostitution in favour of legal forms of pros titution that are regulated by licensing conditions. this recommendation was repeated in the third report. the fifth report also referred to the responsibility of clients expressly noting that clients in the regulated sector must remain alert to abuses since they can also occur in that sector. this argument was further elaborated in the rapporteur s response to the draft bill containing rules on the regulation of prostitution and some other forms of sex related business act on the regulation of prostitution in january . article of the current bill makes it a criminal offence for clients to use the services of a non registered prostitute or a prostitute who is working for an unlicensed operator. the maximum punishment for a breach of article is a prison sentence of six months or a third category fine. rapporteur s response to the draft act on the regulation of prostitution with respect to criminalisation of clients the rapporteur agrees that as the cornerstone of the rules as currently proposed clients must be punishable as provided for in article . the underlying assumption behind this legislative proposal seems to be that victims of human trafficking are only to be found among non registered prostitutes and prostitutes who do not work for a licensed company. however human trafficking also takes place in the legal sector. article of the council of europe s convention on action against trafficking in human beings sug gests that states should consider criminalising clients if they use the services of a prostitute they know to be a victim of human trafficking. the proposed article seems to have a different mainly regulatory effect since it proposes criminalising clients of non registered prostitutes or prostitutes working for a business that has no permit even though prostitutes in these situations are not by definition victims of human trafficking. the dilemma of the confidential relationship is one of the subjects that will be discussed with members of these target groups. how does it affect you to hear about abuses what can you do with the infor mation who does what with this information how are abuses in prostitution dealt with in practice in the workshop participants will be actively confronted with these issues and dilemmas. the target groups will also explore how anonymous tips can be used as an additional weapon against abuse human trafficking and forced prostitution. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . this draft proposal has since been translated into a bill entitled rules on the regulation of prostitution and on combating abuses in the sex industry. parliamentary documents ii no. . reaction of the rapporteur on trafficking in human beings to the draft act on the regulation of pros titution january . for the complete reaction see nrm pp. . in the definitive version of the bill article is renumbered article . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring clients and potential clients should be made aware of their responsibility to buy sexual services only in the regulated sector and to remain alert even then. although it does not arise in this legislative proposal attention needs to be given to the fact that a client of a registered sex worker whom he knows or reasonably could have known was a victim of human trafficking is not currently committing an offence. it should be made a criminal offence in the criminal code. the criminalisation laid down in article does not fully reflect the tenor of article of the convention. by criminalising clients article of the bill provides a cornerstone in criminal law for the channelling discouragement policy . in the reaction to the bill the rapporteur elaborated on the line adopted in the fifth report that clients in the regulated sector must also be alert to abuses. the rapporteur referred to the possibility of punishing clients under the criminal code if they use the services of a prostitute whom they know or reasonably could have known was a victim of human trafficking even if the prostitute was working in the licensed sector. the minister of justice does not agree with such criminalisation. in the memorandum published in response to the report of april the minister of justice who was also acting minister of the interior and kingdom relations responded to this suggestion as follows i am aware that as the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings also remarked in her recom mendation with the approach i have chosen the client of a registered prostitute who is nevertheless the victim of human trafficking falls outside the scope of this definition of the offence. criminalisation of a client who uses the services of a prostitute whom he knows to be in a situation of exploitation is in itself conceivable but is extremely problematic from the perspective of enforcement. awareness among professionals outside the anti human trafficking chain besides members of the general public professionals who are not concerned with human trafficking in a professional capacity but who may incidentally be confronted with it such as youth social workers children s court judges teachers doctors and entrepreneurs can play an important role in identifying human trafficking. before they can identify human trafficking however they have to be made aware of it. like members of the general public these professionals are not always aware of all the ins and outs of human trafficking. the rapporteur has made various recommendations concerning these professionals. for example re commendation in the fifth report refers specifically to providing information about non sexual forms of exploitation to entrepreneurs in risk sectors. a more general recommendation in the fifth report is that every employee of official agencies who could come in contact with human trafficking should re ceive instructions on how to recognise signs of exploitation and should be alert to them. this recom mendation is so broadly formulated that it is difficult to assess the extent to which it has been followed. nrm recommendation . letter form the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings to the minister of the interior and kingdom relations of january in reaction to the draft act on the regulation of prostitution . see also . . . for the complete reaction see nrm p. et seq. the reaction of the minister of justice to this proposal by the rapporteur in fact shows that although criminalisation is conceivable its enforcement would be extremely problematic. see parliamentary do cuments ii no. . parliamentary documents no. . nrm recommendation . recommendations and developments although various government agencies such as the police siod labour inspectorate and ind provide training on human trafficking that does not mean that every employee of these agencies who could come into contact with victims of human trafficking has followed the training or has received instructions on how to tackle human trafficking. for example some police detectives are certified in the area of human trafficking but desk employees and traffic police can also encounter victims of human trafficking. information film for professionals at the time of writing boschfilm was producing a film on human trafficking for the ministries of justice home affairs and kingdom relations and social affairs and employment. the film is exclusively intended for professionals and concentrates on three subjects loverboys the original trafficking in women and other forms of exploitation. the film s target group includes not only pro fessionals who are involved with human trafficking through their jobs but also professionals who may incidentally encounter human trafficking such as people working with the child protection council the chambers of commerce and the youth protection services. . prosecution and trial . . human trafficking as a priority for the public prosecution service combating human trafficking has been a priority for the public prosecution service for a number of years now. in the third report the rapporteur said that tighter national coordination was needed because the differences in how human trafficking was addressed in different districts showed that they did not all devote the same attention to human trafficking. the rapporteur added that since the public prosecution service leads investigations it should indicate more clearly what is necessary and what efforts need to be made to adequately enforce the criminal ban on human trafficking. similar recommendations were made in the fifth report which also called for specific measures to be formulated and implemented in practice to reflect that human trafficking is a policy priority for the public prosecution service. meanwhile all regional offices have a dedicated regional prosecutor for human trafficking and mi grant smuggling and the public prosecution service has established the programme to strengthen the approach to combating human trafficking and migrant smuggling to embed the subject at various levels of the organisation.nrm human trafficking has in any case become an area of specialisation at the regional level in the public prosecution service. rood utrecht made the following recommendation on this besides detectives investigating human trafficking police officers who are the first to come into contact with victims of human trafficking such as front office staff should be trained in communication with victims and should be aware of the internal procedures for intake and reporting human trafficking. rood utrecht in gesprek met slachtoffers van loverboys een onderzoek naar ervaringen met politie en justitie van het proces van aangifte tot de veroordeling june p. . source interview with boschfilm april . the film will be shown to professionals and semi professionals on october . nrm recommendations and . nrm recommendations and . public prosecution service memorandum on strengthening the approach to combating human traf ficking and migrant smuggling . for further discussion of this subject see nrm pp. et seq. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring points raised in the seventh report included the need to safeguard continuity especially where there is a rapid turnover of specialist prosecutors and ensure the availability of sufficient capacity in the public prosecution service. in practice there sometimes seems to be too little time and in addition to regional prosecutors it is important to have sufficient expertise and resources at local level.nrm the rapporteur has been conscious from the outset that although the police and public prosecution service in many cities and regions give priority to investigating and prosecuting human trafficking they must also be given the resources to intensify efforts to combat it. the first report contained the recom mendation that the degree and intensity of the effort made should not be left purely to the interplay between the local or regional authorities the local authority the police and the public prosecution service but should be directed centrally and addressed from a national perspective with the necessary capacity in terms of manpower and equipment being made available. without additional capacity efforts to combat human trafficking would not receive the attention and resources they required among the many other priorities according to the third report. the rapporteur also pointed out that some of the policy proposals of the public prosecution service would probably lead to more investigations and prosecutions of human trafficking which should be taken into account in planning the capacity of the investigative agencies the public prosecution service and the judiciary. the figures show that the number of cases registered by the public prosecution service fluctuated greatly between and . after sharp increases in the intervening period the number of registered cases in had returned to the level of . the number of cases dealt with by the courts in first instance almost doubled in the period . one of the recommendations made by d.w. steenhuis in response to the court s ruling that the prose cution was inadmissible in the sierra human trafficking case in november was that the public prosecution service must ensure that there is sufficient capacity available throughout the entire course of an investigation. some other recommendations made following this case partially substantiate bot tlenecks identified earlier by the rapporteur in relation to capacity both quantitative and qualitative. it is worrying that the public prosecution service observed in its annual report for that the investiga tive services and the public prosecution service are unable to deal with all offences and their perpetrators with the available staff and resources. nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . from in to in and in there were cases registered by the district offices see . . figure . . alkmaar district court november ljn bk and bk . following the dismissal of the case against five defendants in the sierra human trafficking case the chief public prosecutors in haarlem and alkmaar decided to conduct an evaluation of how the case was handled in order to learn from the experience. the recommendations of d.w. steenhuis relate only to this case alles is niets. rapportage naar aanleiding of de niet ontvankelijkheid in de mensenhandelzaak sierra appendix to parliamentary documents no. . the minister of justice has said that measures have been taken at the local level to address the problems that were identified letter of may parliamentary documents no. p. . public prosecution service annual report available at www.jaarberichtom.nl. om behoud veilig heidsniveau niet realistisch de volkskrant may . on this point see . . . recommendations and developments . . policy priorities in the public prosecution service the instructions on human trafficking lay down the procedures for investigating and prosecuting hu man trafficking. indications of human trafficking must be followed up and any relevant leads must be investigated and if possible lead to a prosecution. if a case involves transnational human trafficking the public prosecution service must actively seek international cooperation. investigations into human trafficking should also include financial investigations and enquiries into the possibility of confiscating illegally earned profits.nrm financial investigations and confiscation of illegal earnings with reference to profits as a driving force for human trafficking in the first report was recommended devoting regular and specific attention to the possibility of confiscating illegally earned profits in the netherlands and abroad during the investigation and prosecution of a suspect. that could be the most effective way of repressing the phenomenon the rapporteur felt. the rapporteur noted that it was already the policy of the public prosecution service to investigate money flows with a view to confis cating illegal earnings by instituting a criminal financial investigation if necessary but applying the measure in practice was sometimes thwarted because of problems in gathering evidence in the principal case. the rapporteur also referred to the fact that while discovering the financial benefit to the perpetrator can be important for furnishing evidence it can be particularly helpful in underpinning claims for compensation by the victim. on this point the rapporteur mentioned in the seventh report how important it is for the judge who decides on a victim s claim as an injured party to have the report of the financial investigation. the public prosecutor should either present the claim for confiscation of illegally earned profits at the same time as the main case or submit the financial report during the hearing of the main case. in the third report the rapporteur again referred to the need for a greater effort to achieve results in relation to the confiscation of illegally earned profits. the large profits and low risk of being caught remain an important driving force for potential human traffickers. the rapporteur noted that it is important to commence financial investigations more frequently and earlier in an investiga tion. the investigations should make use of the expertise of the criminal assets confiscation bureau boom and operations should be carried out in cooperation with the financial intelligence unit netherlands formerly the office for the disclosure of unusual transactions mot . international cooperation is also urgently needed in this area if the measures taken are to have an impact since profits made in one country are often invested in another. where possible money flows should be followed to those other countries. the study carried out by bnrm for the fifth report showed that close cooperation with other countries is possible in this type of investigation and can yield useful information. instructions on human trafficking of the public prosecution service government gazette . nrm recommendation . on this point see also . . . nrm p. et seq. and recommendation . nrm recommendation . financial investigations can also be useful in identifying large internatio nal human trafficking organisations facilitators and contacts in the legitimate business world nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring international cooperation in the third report the rapporteur said that the public prosecution service should explain and demon strate more clearly where practical obstacles to international cooperation still occur despite existing legal instruments. a national standard is usually applied in determining the effectiveness of an investi gation and the rapporteur noted that as a result too little was known about the phases of the human trafficking process that take place or have taken place outside the netherlands. this in turn means that the human trafficking chain is often not entirely broken and the criminal activities can therefore be easily resumed. the rapporteur concluded that on balance this outcome can be regarded as unsatis factory and not effective enough. the rapporteur called on the government to promote closer international cooperation and to remove obstacles that cause a situation where only some of the actors in the human trafficking chain are arrested while others in the netherlands and elsewhere are able to avoid trial. this is not only essential from the perspective of upholding standards but also because effective repression contributes to prevention. also relevant in this context is the rapporteur s recommendation that information should be supplied to europol in accordance with existing agreements with a view to increasing cooperation between in ternational police forces both in an operational sense and in terms of sharing information. this will yield a clearer insight into the methods employed by human traffickers and what needs to be done to combat them. eurojust can also play a role in this. one of the action points in the national action plan on human trafficking is that constant attention will be devoted to the netherlands position in relation to other countries in the context of international human trafficking. the investigation codenamed koolvis is a good example of cooperation between the netherlands as a country of destination and transit naptip the anti human trafficking organisation in nigeria where according to the public prosecution service the victims came from and other countries such as spain and italy where the human trafficking organisation operated. the ultimate aim was to identify every member of the criminal organisation. in december a number of suspects were acquitted of human trafficking but the public prosecution service has appealed against those decisions. . . victims in the criminal process treatment of victims there is a growing realisation that a victim particularly in human trafficking cases is no just a wit ness in a criminal trial. for example the draft eu directive on human trafficking contains provisions designed to protect victims during criminal proceedings including measures to prevent secondary nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . national action plan on human trafficking action point . nrm pp. et seq. the district court in zwolle ruled in this case on december ljn bk bk bk bk bk bk . suspects were convicted of migrant smuggling and of membership of a cri minal organisation. recommendations and developments victimisation. one of the possibilities mentioned is the use of communication technology a video link for example to allow a victim to be interviewed without visual contact with the suspect. more generally the rapporteur recommended that the government should indicate whether the eu frame work decision on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings had led to amendments in dutch legislation and if so what they were. this recommendation was concerned among other things with victims being provided at an early stage with information that is important for protecting their interests. in accordance with the public prosecution service s instructions on human trafficking victims in the netherlands must be informed of the possibility of requesting information about the progress of the criminal case concerning them. victims must then be informed of any important decisions made during the investigation. particularly if a suspect is being held in pre trial detention it is important to inform the victim as soon as possible if the suspect is released. suspending or lifting pre trial detention and granting prisoners leave can generate a great deal of con sternation in society particularly if victims were not informed that the suspect was being released or has even fled abroad. situations like this prompted the current minister of justice to say that the next gover nment should produce a plan for giving victims the opportunity to express their views about whether a convicted person should be granted leave. victims may be a factor in other judicial decisions. the district court in leeuwarden for example refused to grant conditional parole to a convicted human trafficker in june . this person was sentenced in to four years in prison for human trafficking involving four victims. later that year he failed to return from a weekend leave and was ultimately arrested in germany. in this case the public prosecutor had argued that on the very first day of his leave the convicted person had visited the prostitution zone where the offences for which he was convicted had taken place looking for one of the victims. he was also in a prostitution zone when he was arrested in germany where he was accompanied by his girlfriend who was also a victim in the case. although the court was cursory in its statement of the grounds for its decision not to grant a conditional release it did refer to the events that had occurred during the period he was free. non punishment principle victims of human trafficking are sometimes also perpetrators of criminal offences that are connected with the human trafficking situation. the rapporteur conducted research into this problem and the application of the non punishment principle and made a number of recommendations on the basis of that study. an important recommendation was that a person s status as a victim of human trafficking proposal for a directive of the european parliament and of the council on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting victims repealing framework decision jha march com final cod article . on this point see also . . nrm recommendation . the act to strengthen the standing of victims in the criminal process arose in part from this framework decision oj l bulletin of acts orders and decrees . see also nrm recommendation . instructions on human trafficking of the public prosecution service government gazette. . slachtoffer horen over verlof veroordeelde de telegraaf may . leeuwarden district court june not published . nrm chapter . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring should be regarded as grounds for declining to prosecute that person. the rapporteur also recom mended inserting a provision in the instructions on human trafficking that when a victim commits a criminal offence the fact that the suspect is a victim should be noted in the official report. at the time of writing these recommendations had not yet been implemented. however in a number of judgments is for the first time specifically referred to this problem and to the application of the non punishment principle. one of those cases is described below. application of the non punishment principle in a recent case before the district court in the hague the public prosecutor explicitly referred to the non punishment principle and decided in accordance with that principle not to prosecute the victim concerned who was also a suspect. in this case a victim of human trafficking was herself suspected of involvement in human trafficking with respect to other victims. the public prosecutor explained her reasons for not prosecuting victim a as follows the public prosecutor told the court that a was arrested on october . it quickly emerged from her statements but also from the statements of the other women that a was herself also a victim. the public prosecutor based her decision not to prosecute a on the non punishment principle and on the following facts and circumstances a also worked as a prostitute herself and handed her money over to the suspect. she watched over the other women but did not coerce them. the other women regarded her as a victim not as a suspect. she was under the influence of the suspect because he had promised her a future with him and she still loved him. she controlled the other women to avoid being abused or threatened by the suspect. she was afraid of the suspect. the non punishment principle laid down in article of the council of europe s convention on action against human trafficking says that states must provide for the possibility of not punishing victims of human trafficking for their involvement in unlawful activities to the extent that they have been compelled to do so. compensation and confiscation in the first report the rapporteur said that greater efforts should be made under existing legislation cri minal and civil to secure compensation for victims of human trafficking. in this context a connection was made with financial investigations because as mentioned above discovering the financial benefits enjoyed by the perpetrator can be important not only in furnishing evidence but also for underpinning claims for compensation by the victim. the link between compensation and confiscation of illegally earned profits was explicitly made in a recommendation in the seventh report. this recommendation states that it should be made possible by law in addition to the existing possibilities for a decision on a claim by an injured party that is submitted in accordance with article b of the dutch code of cri minal procedure to be deferred and made at the same time as the decision on the demand for an order nrm recommendation . nrm recommendation . see also the hague court of appeal january mehak ljn bk bk bk . the hague district court december ljn bk . recommendations and developments to confiscate illegal earnings rather than at the time of the judgment in the criminal case. at the time of writing this recommendation had not yet been implemented. it is still very difficult for victims of human trafficking to secure compensation for material damage and emotional injury including loss of income. the arrangements for payment of an advance on a compensation award by the violent offences compensation fund could help to partially rectify this. . . case law on human trafficking in the sex industry for the seventh report the rapporteur commissioned a study of the criminal case law concerning hu man trafficking in the sex industry. in response to this study the rapporteur observed that article f of the dutch criminal code is not a straightforward provision. one of the points to emerge from the study was that judges differ in their interpretation of various legal issues and that there is no uniformity in how the context of violence coercion deception and the possibility for victims to escape from their situation is assessed. the number of acquittals in human trafficking cases is high for example in comparison with the num ber in rape cases. the statistics also show that the number of convictions has declined over the years. in there were convictions in of cases. contrary to expectations the bnrm study into human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance in indicated that this was only partly due to the absence of reliable statements by victims and witnesses. the rapporteur has recommended that guidelines should be formulated to provide guidance for judges in determining sentences in individual cases and so create consistency of sentencing in human trafficking cases. the national consultative body for presidents of criminal sectors of courts lovs is currently investigating the possibility of developing guidelines to promote uniformity of sentencing in human trafficking cases. it has been suggested to the lovs that it should form a working group to formulate internal principles for sentencing. the public prosecution service has also commenced preparations to draw up guidelines for the sentences to be demanded in human trafficking cases. the aim is to have these guidelines in place by the end of . another finding from the bnrm study of case law that led to a recommendation related to a num ber of cases in which attempted human trafficking was declared proven when in fact the full offence nrm recommendation . for a survey of the possibilities for victims of human trafficking to secure compensation see nrm p. et seq. the act providing for this system of advance payments among other things the act of december to amend the code of criminal procedure the criminal code and the violent offences com pensation fund act to improve the standing of the victim in the criminal process was published on january bulletin of acts orders and decrees .the law enters into force on january bulletin of acts orders and decrees . see also . . . see . . figure . . nrm recommendation . parliamentary documents no. p. . memorandum on human trafficking by the public prosecution service submitted for information purposes to the meeting of the task force in may . parliamentary documents no. p. . a first guideline the guideline on criminal pro cedure for human trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation was published on august government gazette no . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring had usually been committed. attempted human trafficking is scarcely ever prosecuted. nevertheless supreme court jurisprudence on attempted human trafficking provides adequate grounds for doing so. the rapporteur advised the public prosecution service to address this issue since the successful prosecution of attempted human trafficking could have a preventive effect. in a case before the police magistrate in rotterdam in january an underage suspect was char ged with attempted human trafficking among other things. the victim was a girl of . according to the public prosecutor the suspect had asked her to work for him in prostitution and earn money for him with sex. he had offered her via msn to men clients for the performance of sexual acts. he had maintained contact with men and arranged clients for her and he had offered to bring her to rendezous points and to transport her to perform sexual acts. the judge found that attempted human trafficking had been proven if only because the suspect had asked the victim to work for him and had offered her services via msn article f in conjunction with article of the dutch criminal code and imposed a sentence of hours of community service. in this case the planned crime human trafficking had not actually been carried out. bnrm plans to publish the findings of a follow up study of the case law in . one of the subjects to be covered in that study is the period of pre trial detention. . . prosecution and trial of human trafficking outside the sex industry other forms of exploitation a comprehensive picture of the various stages is needed with human trafficking in sectors other than the sex industry there is often a combination of indicati ons of exploitation. these individual indications may for example involve violations of the economic offences act foreign nationals employment act and the minimum wage and minimum holiday al lowance act. it only becomes clear that there might be a situation of exploitation when these indications are seen as a whole.nrm in the seventh report therefore the rapporteur recommended an integrated approach to cases involving other forms of exploitation. in that context it is important that the hu man trafficking and any related criminal offences are dealt with simultaneously by the same forum so that the judge has a complete picture of the human trafficking. this recommendation is connected with recommendation in the fifth report when the rapporteur called for the inclusion of official reports about the conditions and background information about the nature and seriousness of the offences in the criminal file. in the case of other forms of exploitation it might for example be relevant to film or take photos of the workplace and to measure the temperature for extreme heat or cold. these methods were used in the case of the indonesian kitchen workers . supreme court october ljn ab . nrm recommendation . information from the public prosecution service to bnrm february . rotterdam district court record of the verbal judgment of the police magistrate january not published . see also nrm pp. et seq. nrm recommendation . nrm pp. . there were convictions in this case see the hague district court may ljn bm . recommendations and developments judgments a number of judgments on exploitation outside the sex industry some by the courts of appeal and the supreme court have appeared since the publication of the seventh report. a very important judgement was the supreme court s ruling in the chinese restaurant case. chinese restaurant supreme court october ljn bi this case concerned a suspicion of exploitation of chinese workers living illegally in the nether lands. they were working under poor conditions in a restaurant. large numbers of them slept together in the same room they worked long hours and had no days off. the question to be decided concerned the definition of the elements of the charges abuse of au thority arising from the actual state of affairs abuse of a vulnerable position and exploitation . the court of appeal in den bosch upheld the judgment of the district court in den bosch that a presumption of abuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs and abuse of a vulnerable position requires a certain initiative and positive action on the part of the perpetrator whereby the weaker or vulnerable position of the victims is consciously abused. the appeal court found that the suspects had not taken any initiative or action with respect to the chinese. the chinese approached the restaurant themselves and had themselves come to the netherlands to work. under those cir cumstances the appeal court found it could not be proved that the suspects had consciously abused the vulnerable position of the chinese by taking them in and housing them. the appeal court also found that there was no question of exploitation deciding that although the situation was socially undesirable it had not been shown that the working conditions were in themselves bad. furthermore the chinese received the money they earned and according to the appeal court it could not be said of the chinese that they did not have any reasonable choice but to work or to reside in the restaurant. the public prosecution service appealed to the supreme court. one of its grounds for appeal was that the appeal court had wrongly interpreted article a of the old dutch criminal code in par ticular the elements abuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs and abuse of a vulnerable position contained in the charges. the appeal also complained that the appeal court had failed to give adequate reasons for its finding that there was no exploitation . the supreme court ruled that to prove abuse it is sufficient to show conditional intent on the part of the suspect with respect to those circumstances. the same applies for cases where the victim is in a vulnerable position. there is no need as the appeal court found for conscious abuse. the appeal court s requirement of initiative on the part of the suspect is therefore not an independent requirement. with respect to the term exploitation the supreme court found that it is impossible to give a general definition of when there is exploitation but that it depends heavily on the circumstances see also j.silvis vooropgestelde arresten. ontwikkelingen in de strafrechtelijke jurisprudentie the hague pp. . for an analysis of this case in first instance and on appeal see also nrm pp. . den bosch court of appeal january ljn bc and ljn bc . den bosch district court march ljn ba and ljn ba . the judgment against a third suspect in this case followed several months later den bosch district court july ljn bd and also ended in acquittal for human trafficking. supreme court october ljn bi . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring of the case. in a case like the present one relevant factors in the assessment include the nature and duration of the work the restrictions they impose on the individuals concerned and the economic benefit to the employer. the generally accepted standards in dutch society should be adopted as the frame of reference for weighing those factors. the supreme court also found that to meet the definition of the offence it is not necessary for the victim to be actually exploited. the supreme court reached the conclusion that the appeal court s decision that there was no situation of ex ploitation was incomprehensible without further reasoning given that court s finding that some victims worked to hours a day just for room and board and others for a monthly income of and that they had no more than five days off a month and that they had to share their bedroom with others. the case was referred back to the appeal court in den bosch. since the supreme court s judgment five more new cases concerning other forms of exploitation have been dealt with by different courts four of which led to convictions for human trafficking in the sense of other forms of exploitation. appeals in two other cases also led to convictions. the number of convictions for other forms of exploitation has risen since the supreme court s judgment in the chi nese restaurant case. up to june a total of different cases almost every one of which involved a number of suspects had come before the courts and nine of them had led to convictions. not all of the judgments are final however. before october the date of the supreme court s judgment cases had been dealt with of which four had resulted to convictions. compared with the period of almost five years prior to that judgment both the number of cases dealt with and the number of con victions for other forms of exploitation have risen steeply. the appeal court in den bosch had not yet re heard the case at the time of writing. a third suspect was convicted of human trafficking by the court of appeal in den bosch den bosch court of appeal fe bruary ljn bl . the case against this suspect had previously only been heard in first instance. these were the hague district court march ljn bl dordrecht district court april ljn bm the hague district court may ljn bm and the hague district court may ljn bm . the only case that ended in an acquittal was the hague district court february ljn bl . the hague court of appeal january ljn bk and ljn bk and den bosch court of appeal february ljn bl . data collection and statistical trends . introduction this chapter is devoted to the quantitative data that has been collected in the last decade in relation to human trafficking. in . there is a discussion of developments in international harmonised data col lection and the interpretation of quantitative data collected at national level. the statistical trends at national level in the last decade are presented in . and . with the focus on victims in . and on suspects and offenders in . . . data collection attention for the subject of human trafficking has grown enormously in the last ten years not only in the netherlands but also internationally creating a need for more knowledge including quantitative data about the phenomenon in order to increase the effectiveness of efforts to prevent and combat human trafficking and to provide better protection for victims. . . international harmonised data collection insight into the nature and scale of human trafficking at international level can help to improve efforts to prevent and combat it. accordingly numerous international documents have stressed the impor tance of international harmonisation of data collection on the topic of human trafficking starting with the the hague declaration of and most recently the action plan implementing the stockholm programme in april see . . . consequently various initiatives have been taken in this area including development of guidelines for the collection of data on trafficking in human beings including comparable indicators the rapporteur made a recommendation on the subject in nrm recommendation . the hague ministerial declaration on european guidelines for effective measures to prevent and combat trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation. action plan implementing the stockholm programme april com def. see also for example the council conclusions on establishing an informal eu network of national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms on trafficking in human beings th justice and home affairs council meeting luxembourg june . guidelines for the collection of data on trafficking in human beings including comparable indicators iom arono witz a. . for a brief description see nrm . . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring programme for the enhancement of anti trafficking responses in south eastern europe data collection and infor mation management dcim i succeeded by trafficking in human beings data collection and harmonised information management systems dcim eu european delphi survey a practical exercise in developing indicators of trafficking in human beings and the montrasec project . bnrm is or has been a partner in a number of these projects. the montrasec project monitoring trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of children deser ves a special mention here. the intention of the montrasec system is to produce internationally comparable integrated and up to date data with the help of advanced software. the system can automatically upload data from existing registration systems so that no additional work is required to enter the data. the european commission financed or co financed almost all of the initiatives mentioned here see . . with a view to developing the maximum possible expertise in the field of international data collection on human trafficking. however there is a risk that the multiplicity of initiatives will lead to different standards being implemented in different countries which could present an obstacle to achie ving the international harmonisation of data. it is also important for new initiatives to build on the results of projects that have already been completed. the network of national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms could play a role in steering these developments see . . . another point that needs to be made in connection with the initiatives in the field of data collection is that it is not yet possible in the netherlands to collect data on all of the proposed indicators. experience has shown that unfortunately the quality of the data can suffer if too much data on human trafficking have to be collected. according to the less is more principle it might therefore be preferable to com mence efforts to harmonise international data collection with only the most basic indicators. if the initial results are evaluated positively the harmonised international data collection could then perhaps be expanded with other indicators in order to achieve the ultimate objective of the data collection which is to prevent and combat human trafficking. it is important to realise in this context that data collection is not a goal in itself. handbook on anti trafficking data collection in south eastern europe developing regional criteria icmpd surtees r. . for a brief description see nrm . . at the time of writing phase two of this project dcim ii which involved writing a manual for the data analysis was being completed. anti trafficking data collection and information management in the european union a handbook the situation in the czech republic poland portugal and the slovak republic icmpd surtees r. . european delphi survey on indicators of trafficking in human beings jointly implemented by the european commission and the ilo ilo and operational indicators of trafficking in human beings results from a delphi survey implemented by the ilo and the european commission ilo . for a brief description see nrm . . this project a follow up to the siamsect project yielded the following publication the montrasec demo. a bench mark for member state and eu automated data collection and reporting on trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of children ircp vermeulen g. paterson n. . in dcim i dcim ii dcim eu and european delphi survey. montrasec is a consortium of ircp institute for international research on criminal policy belgium and trans crime joint research centre on transnational crime italy and is co financed by the european commission. except dcim i and ii. expert meeting montrasec brussels october . nrm . . data collection and statistical trends . . interpretation of quantitative data since human trafficking is often hidden and victims are often unwilling or afraid to speak out or do not realise that they are victims there are probably a large number of unknown cases of human trafficking a large dark number . consequently statistical trends based on the number of known cases of human traf ficking usually do not directly reflect developments in the total number of cases of human trafficking . the number of known situations of human trafficking depends to a large extent on factors such as the pu blic attention for human trafficking the priorities of the investigative services and the public prosecution service the method of registration employed by victim support organisations and changes in the law. at the same time the coincidental discovery of a single but major human trafficking case has a substantial impact on the annual figures since the total number of known cases of human trafficking each year is relatively small. the notification to comensha of victims discovered in the same human trafficking situation see . . for example is clearly reflected in the annual figures for victims as regards the total number of reported victims the background characteristics of victims such as gender age and nationality and the sector in which victims were exploited . it is therefore important when analysing the data to be aware of the specific context in which the data were collected and of the various factors that might influence the data. in the following sections and subsections the cautionary notes applicable to the data presented are discussed at length and where possible statistical trends are explained in relation to the developments that were previously described in chapter . . victims this section contains data on registered victims of human trafficking in the netherlands in other words victims known to the relevant agencies in the netherlands . the findings are based on information from the human trafficking coordination centre comensha in . . background details of victims reported to comensha for reasons of fear shame or guilt. non dutch victims could also face a language barrier and or not know who they can report to in the netherlands. furthermore victims living illegally in the nether lands sometimes fear the police because they are afraid of being deported. sometimes victims are also in debt to the human trafficker a debt that they believe they have to pay off. or non dutch victims feel an obligation to send money back regularly to their family nrm . nrm . . for example victims of traditional loverboys who are in love with their loverboy nrm . . or non dutch victims who prefer being exploited in the netherlands to the situation in their own country nrm . . . in other words including the large number of cases of human trafficking that are probably not know about. in other words cases involving a relatively large number of victims and or offenders. the victims and or offenders in the same case often share the same characteristics such as gender age group natio nality and the sector in which the exploitation occurred . in this type of major case the exploitation often occurs outside the sex industry. with the growing attention to other forms of exploitation both in terms of investigation and prosecution and in society major cases of other forms of exploitation will probably come to light increasingly often in the future. because of the anticipated large dark number there will be a large number of unknown victims of human trafficking see . . . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring information from the immigration and naturalisation service ind in . . background details of victims who were granted a b residence permit and information from the central fines collection agency cjib in . . about orders to pay compen sation to victims . . . victims in the comensha register comensha is the central agency for notification of all victims of human trafficking in the netherlands. comensha must therefore be notified of every potential victim identified in the netherlands by the indivi dual or agency that has become aware of the victim or by the victim personally . victims can be reported solely for the purpose of registration for registration and information or for registration and shelter. research method the information in this subsection . . for the period since is largely based on databases provi ded to bnrm by comensha. information about individual victims can be derived from these databases secondary analysis . some of the data are taken from comensha s annual reports. for the period prior to bnrm based its findings solely on those annual reports. for the explanatory notes to the figures and tables in this section the additional tables in appendix and the applicable statistics see appendix . remarks about the figures comensha s records are intended to cover all known victims of human trafficking in the netherlands. however in reality the number of victims registered with comensha will always be just an approximation of the actual number of known victims in the netherlands because for example known victims are not all reported to comensha. the rapporteur made recommendations to improve this situation in the third fifth and seventh re ports . one of the action points in the national action plan on human trafficking nam also addres ses this issue and questions have been asked in parliament about the matter. thanks to improvements until the end of comensha was known as the foundation against trafficking in women stv . for the reader s convenience this section always refers to comensha even when the data concerned relate to the period when comensha was still called stv. in addition to registering victims comensha is also responsible for providing information to and arran ging shelter for victims. see also purpose of notification registration and shelter later in this section. in some cases the data presented here differ from the figures in comensha s annual reports. according to comensha the data presented in the bnrm reports are the correct ones information received in writing from comensha . parties that can identify human trafficking may not all be familiar with comensha as a reporting centre for victims of human trafficking or are not aware that dutch and underage victims should also be reported. in point of fact only the police are obliged pursuant to the b regulation to report victims of human trafficking to comensha. naturally this obligation does not apply for dutch victims. nevertheless it is important that also dutch victims are being reported. nrm recommendation nrm recommendation nrm recommendation . national action plan on human trafficking action point . attachment to parliamentary proceedings ii no. questions and attachment to parliamentary pro ceedings ii no. replies . data collection and statistical trends that have been made in this regard and the growing attention devoted to human trafficking in the last decade it is likely that victims will be identified nd reported more often in the future. at the same time it is possible that the persons reported to comensha are not all actually victims so the number of registered victims could also be higher than the actual number of known victims in the netherlands. this is because there is no formal assessment based on specific criteria by which the regis tered person s status as a victim can be verified. furthermore most victims do not report personally to comensha but are reported by agencies such as the police. accordingly comensha depends on the information provided by the notifier about the vic tim concerned. in many cases this information consists of no more than the most basic details gender age nationality despite requests for further information. since the registration of victims of human trafficking is a core task of comensha partly for the benefit of bnrm the ministry of justice has released additional funds to improve registration in accordance with the recommendations made by the rap porteur in the fifth and seventh reports and in the nam. the ensuing modernisation of registration by comensha project was still underway at the time of writing. finally it should be noted that double counting cannot be entirely ruled out in the statistics up to and including . number of reported victims figure . shows the trend in the number of victims reported to comensha each year in the last decade. developments in the number of victims reported annually to comensha should therefore be seen in this context which is also apparent from the replies to questions in parliament attachment to parlia mentary proceedings ii no. questions and attachment to parliamentary proceedings ii no. replies . comensha decides itself not to register a reported victim in the case of very vague reports . howe ver comensha has no firm criteria for defining a vague report information received verbally from comensha . see notifiers later in this section. accordingly it was decided to present only these almost complete data in this report and to omit the data with large numbers of missing values since they would not give a representative picture. an exception is only made for the sectors in which the reported victims were exploited. in light of the importance of this information it was decided to report it even though for a substantial proportion of the victims the sector in which they were exploited is not known. nrm recommendation nrm recommendation . national action plan on human trafficking action point . bnrm is a member of the steering group. the intention is to establish together with the notifiers the parties providing data what dataset should be used guided by the principle less is more and to secure a commitment from the notifiers to supply these data consistently. since comensha has received almost no reports of anonymous victims which could lead to double counting . previously it had. at the time some notifiers did not provide the names of victims which made it impossible to identify victims who had been counted twice information received ver bally from comensha . for the table with the detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth in relation to the preceding year see appendix table b . . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring figure . number of reported victims the number of victims reported to comensha annually has almost trebled in the last ten years growing from to . up to and including the number fluctuated between and but has risen steadily since . the likely explanation for the increase is the intensification of investigations by the police and the public prosecution service see . . as well as the growing attention to human trafficking see . . it is also possible that there is greater awareness and in more agencies of the need to report victims of human trafficking to comensha. gender of reported victims figure . shows the distribution by gender of the victims reported to comensha each year in the period . figure . gender of reported victims scarcely any male victims were reported to comensha in the period up to and including . that situation changed from very likely because of the criminalisation of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry with effect from january see . . and . . . there has been an increase in the number of new notifiers over the last decade see appendix table b . . for the table with the detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . n um be r year number of reported victims year male female data collection and statistical trends the relatively large proportion of male victims in compared with a maximum of in the pe riod can very probably be explained in part by the large number of men mainly romanians who are believed to have been exploited on an asparagus farm in someren. of the male victims in including romanians were exploited in agriculture and horticulture. age of reported victims figure . shows the age distribution of the victims reported to comensha each year in the period . it should be noted that the figure relates to the age of the victim at the time of the notification to comensha which is often not the same as the victim s age when he or she is believed to have first become a victim. figure . age of reported victims the ages of a relatively large proportion of the reported victims between and between and are unknown so the following description of the trend in the age distribution only refers to the period since . the age group is the largest every year representing between and of all reported victims from . the number of underage victims ranged from in to in and was lower in than in the three previous years. nationality of reported victims table . ranks the five most common nationalities of victims reported to comensha each year in the last decade. comensha annual report . the case of the indonesian kitchen workers see . . and nrm . probably also had an impact on the high number of male victims in . in that year nine male indonesian victims who were being exploited in the food industry were reported to comensha. for a full list of the nationalities of the male victims reported to comensha since see appendix table b . . in the period the share of male victims was . comensha has only also registered the age of victims reported to it since . for a table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . see nrm . . for the countries of origin of the victims reported to comensha in the period . year unknown trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table . ranking of the top nationalities of reported victims n n n n n n n n n n n dutch nigerian bulgarian romanian chinese hungarian sierra leonean czech russian ukrainian brazilian source stv comensha annual reports and databases. dutch has been the most common nationality of reported victims since . before then the first place had been occupied for three years by victims with the bulgarian nationality . nigerian is the only nationality to appear in the top in each of the years reported here and it occupies second place over the period as a whole. from on chinese victims appeared again in the top for the first time since . however in they were just outside the top just like the sierra leonean victims. hungarian is a noteworthy new entrant in the top nationalities since and has now occupied fourth place for two years. romanian was again one of the most common nationalities of victims in probably as a result of the alleged exploitation on the asparagus farm in someren. comensha registered romanian victims men and women who were exploited in the agriculture and horticulture sector in . victims of a total of different nationalities were reported to comensha in the last decade excluding the category unknown . figure . shows the trend in the top nationalities overall in the period . the top nationalities overall are dutch nigerian bulgarian romanian and chinese see since the top over the entire ten year period is based on the absolute number of reported victims n the later years when more victims were reported than in previous years logically have a greater influence on the overall top . it is important to bear this in mind especially since the increase in the number of victims reported each year is probably due more to the increased attention for human trafficking than to an increase in the actual number of victims see earlier in this section under number of reported victims for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including all other nationalities the top nationalities by year and the top overall see appendix table b . . data collection and statistical trends table . last column although these five nationalities do not make up the top in each individual year see table . . figure . trend in the overall top nationalities of reported victims the proportion of dutch victims has increased greatly in the last decade from in to in . this increase started in . dutch has been the most common nationality since that year see table . . a possible explanation for this development is the growing concern about human trafficking see . including the growing attention to the specific problem of loverboys see . . . the largest number of dutch victims was reported in n whereupon in the number declined for the first time since in both absolute and relative terms . the proportion of nigerian victims has fluctuated in the last years from a minimum of in to a maximum of in . bulgarian is on average the third most common nationality of victims at but the percentage of bulgarians declined steadily after to just in and . there was a sudden increase in reports of chinese victims in and of romanian victims in . nationality of reported underage victims this section looks specifically at the nationalities of underage victims of human trafficking. figure . shows that the proportion of minors among all victims each year fluctuated between and in the period . table . shows the five most common nationalities of underage victims reported to comensha in each year between and . for example we can see from figure . that in the five nationalities that constitute the top overall only accounted for of the reported victims while the top for consisting of bulgarian russian ukrainian nigerian and dutch represented of the reported victims see appendix table b . . awareness that dutch victims should also be reported to comensha has also grown. as already noted this can be explained by the alleged exploitation on the asparagus farm in someren. see also appendix table b . . comensha has registered the age of reported victims since but the link between nationality and age can only be made from on since that is the year when bnrm started using databases supplied by comensha rather than just its annual reports see research method earlier in this section . for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including the absolute and relative numbers of all nationalities in a year the top each year and the top overall see appendix table b . . year chinese romanian bulgarian nigerian dutch trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table . ranking of top nationalities of reported underage victims dutch nigerian chinese guinean sierra leonean romanian bulgarian source stv comensha databases. during the period shown here the top nationalities are the same almost every year. dutch comes first every year generally followed by west african nationalities nigerian guinean and sierra leonean and chinese. guinean entered the top in the year in which east european nationalities romanian and bulgarian disappeared from the rankings. table b . in appendix shows that an average of of all underage victims were dutch and were nigerian in the period . these two nationalities headed the list by some distance. we investigated whether there is any difference between the proportion of underage victims among dutch victims and among nigerians or other non dutch victims. figure . presents the results for the period . there were significantly more underage victims among nigerian victims in and than among dutch victims and and other non dutch victims and . these differences are very significant. remarkably the proportion of underage victims among nigerian victims was smallest in com pared with among other non dutch victims and among dutch victims having fallen dramatically from in . the reason for this decline was probably the successful completion of the koolvis investi underage dutch victims of human trafficking are often linked with the loverboy problem for more about this problem see . nrm . . nrm . . nrm . and nrm . . . however not all underage dutch victims are victims of loverboys and adults can also be victims of loverboys especially since the age of victims registered by comensha is their age at the time of notification and not their age when they first became a victim . two of the underage dutch victims in were male and there were no underage male dutch victims in the period . underage nigerian victims of human trafficking are often linked to unaccompanied underage nigerian aliens who disappear to an unknown destination from reception centers for more information about this see . nrm . . nrm . . in relation to the other nationalities in the top chinese and guinean and sierra leonean both . for the table with the detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . p . p . . data collection and statistical trends gation into a major nigerian human trafficking network in october . in as in the propor tion of underage victims was by far the largest among dutch victims. these differences are very significant. figure . proportion of underage victims among dutch nigerian and other non dutch reported victims sectors in which victims were exploited since the criminalisation of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry in see . . and . . comensha now registers the sector in which a victim was allegedly exploited. bnrm has this information for the period since which is presented in figure . . the category exploitation other could refer to a form of exploitation in the sex industry or in another sector. figure . sectors in which victims were exploited for more information about the koolvis investigation see nrm . . . p . p . . for the table with the complete and detailed overview of the data including a breakdown by gender and the different forms of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry see appendix table b . . the sector in which victims in the category exploitation other were exploited is known. these cases involve a sector for which there is no separate category in the comensha register so they are generally sectors in which cases have never or only very occasionally occurred previously . since the share of exploitation other is in this category should be defined more precisely in the future. no victims of forced organ donation have been reported to comensha up to now with the exception of one indian male victim in see nrm . . . this incident cannot be seen in figure . because the proportion has been rounded off to . year proportion of underage victims among nigerian victims proportion of underage victims among other non dutch victims proportion of underage victims among dutch victims year not yet exploited exploitation other unknown exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry exploitation in the sex industry trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring every year for roughly of the victims it is not known whether they have been exploited or if they were exploited in which sector. what can be stated in any case is that in the period between and of the reported victims at least had not actually been exploited because they had not yet worked. at least half of the reported victims were exploited in the sex industry . of the victims who were exploited in the sex industry in a quarter were underage n . in underage victims in the sex industry accounted for a fifth of the and in for a tenth of the . the minimum percentage of victims who were exploited in a sector other than the sex industry rose to in compared with in and in . this can be explained mainly by the incre ased efforts to investigate exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and the greater attention to this phenomenon see . . these forms of exploitation are being discovered and recognised more frequently. as already noted in . . these are often situations where an investigation reveals a relatively large number of victims and which therefore have a significant impact on the overall figures. the suspected exploitation on the asparagus farm in someren in is a good example of this see also under gender of reported victims figure . and nationality of reported victims table . and figure . . in of the cases of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry in the period the exploitation occurred in the agriculture and horticulture sector of these cases were in . consequently since the agriculture and horticulture sector has been the predominant sector outside the sex industry for suspected exploitation while in and there were almost no reported situations of exploitation in those sectors. the main sectors outside the sex industry where exploitation occurred in the period covered after agriculture and horticulture were domestic work victims in the period and the hospitality sector victims in the period and with cases divided more evenly over the years . notifiers since comensha has registered the person or agency that has reported a victim to it. figures . a and b show where most reports of victims came from in and the top . of whom had dutch nationality. such as agriculture and horticulture domestic work hospitality construction the food industry drug dealing etc. see appendix table b . . none of the reported victims who were exploited in sectors other than the sex industry had dutch nationality with the exception of four dutch victims in who were exploited in drug dealing. this trend will probably continue in the future. these suspected victims were romanian men romanian women four portuguese men and two polish men. the average age of the victims was significantly higher . years old sd . n than the age of the victims who were not exploited in agriculture and horticulture in . years old sd . n the age of of them is not known . this result is very significant p . . for the table with the complete overview of these data including all other notifiers the data for the period and the top overall see appendix table b . . data collection and statistical trends figure . a notifiers figure . b notifiers by far the largest number of notifications in every year from to came from the police whose share of all annual notifications ranged from in to in . interestingly figures . a and b show that with the exception of the police the five leading notifiers in no longer appear in the top in . however that does not mean that they no longer report victims. the figures also show that the top notifiers in together account for of all the notifications which is more than the corresponding figure of in . the notifiers and their shares of notifications vary over the years. appendix table b . provides more details on this. purpose of notification registration nd shelter as described in the introduction to this section victims are reported to comensha for various reasons. one of the reasons is for registration and shelter. of the victims reported in were reported for the purposes of securing shelter. of those victims requiring shelter were also found a place in note from the number of notifications in a single year is no longer the same as the number of reported victims in a single year see the explanation for this in appendix table b . . in another seven reports came from shelter facilities from individuals four from refugee asylum organisations and eleven from youth care services . some notifiers have disappeared over the years and others such as the siod in have appeared. of the siod notifications in concerned victims discovered in the agriculture and horticulture sector someren case . it is for the first time that bnrm reports this kind of information. that is why only the year is reported. individual youth care services other noti ers including unknown anonymous shelter facility police refugee asylum worker other organisations royal netherlands marechaussee networks for victims of human tra cking police social intelligence and investigation service siod other noti ers trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring a shelter of them in emergency accommodation because of a lack of suitable places. figure . shows who reported the victims that required shelter in total of notifications of different victims . figure . purpose of notification registration nd shelter three quarters of the victims who were reported for the purpose of registration and shelter in were reported by the police. the other victims requiring shelter were notified mainly by networks for human trafficking victims and the royal netherlands marechaussee. . . victims and the b regulation non dutch potential victims and witnesses of human trafficking without a residence permit can claim a temporary residence permit on the basis of chapter of the aliens act implementation guidelines if after a reflection period of up to three months they cooperate with the investigation and prosecution by the police and or the public prosecution service. this temporary residence permit gives them access to certain services reception shelter medical assistance legal advice and special facilities to support themselves . as regards non dutch victims who are living legally in the netherlands the b regulation provides as follows for the sake of completeness it should be noted that nationals of the eu and eea and swiss nationals can also derive rights from the provisions and procedure laid down in this chapter insofar as they do not have rights under community law . in the netherlands requests for residence permits under the b regulation are submitted to the im migration and naturalisation service ind which makes a decision on them. reporting the crime of annual report comensha for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including the other purposes of notification by notifier see appendix table b . . for the reader s convenience elsewhere in this section the term victims will be used. for the reader s convenience elsewhere in this section the term b regulation will be used. the terms b applications and b awards are used for applications for a temporary residence permit on the basis of the b regulation and the granting of a temporary residence permit respectively. until november reporting a crime was a requirement. since then it has also been sufficient for victims to cooperate in some other way with the investigation and prosecution witnesses are still required to report a crime . aliens act implementation guidelines b april . for more information about the b regulation see . . royal netherlands marechaussee networks of victims of human tra cking police other noti ers data collection and statistical trends human trafficking or otherwise cooperating with the police and or public prosecution service is regar ded ex officio as an application for a b residence permit. b applications are therefore always submitted to the ind by the police. research method the information in this subsection . . is based on the databases delivered each year by the ind to the bnrm containing records of all contacts in which the b regulation played a role. information about individual victims can be derived from these databases secondary analysis . because of omissions in the system caused by the transfer of the aliens administration system from the aliens police to the ind no figures can be reported for and . for explanatory notes to the figures and tables in this section the additional tables in appendix and the statistics applicable to them see appendix . remarks about the figures ind records contain the details of all victims who have submitted an application for b status and who have been granted a b residence permit. however the number of victims selected on the basis of the b regulation from the ind records is probably not precisely the same as the number of victims who made an application under that regulation. the number selected may be lower than the actual number because the ind has no standard and man datory procedure for registering applications under the b regulation. it is therefore possible that victims who invoke the b regulation cannot all be traced. the rapporteur has made a number of recom mendations to improve the ind s registration of initial b applications and b awards and of decisions made on objections and on subsequent appeals. at the time of writing the ind was developing a new registration system called indigo. reporting a crime is often a very emotional experience other forms of cooperation are probably less so and victims fear an ultimate acquittal sometimes because of a feeling of inequality of arms which can lead to secondary victimisation nrm . nrm . . however there are signs that in practice victims are not always informed of the possibilities afforded by the b regulation or of the reflection period of up to three months . this is because some police forces were or are unclear about the options and the applicability of the b regulation particularly with respect to non dutch victims who are living legally in the netherlands. this is probably almost never the case any longer. after all a victim might be pursuing various procedures and have various contacts in each procedure with the ind. a person who applies for a b residence permit is sometimes registered as receiving a residence permit on other grounds for example residence with partner or working in the eu . the opposite also sometimes occurs a b residence permit is granted to a person who had not applied for one at the time of the initial registration. persons who are linked to the b regulation either in the application for or the granting of a permit are included in the selection. the figures concerning b applications and b awards in this section could in fact differ somewhat from the ind s figures due to the fact that victims who are at any time linked to the b regulation and are also pursuing another procedure with the ind for residence for another purpose might not be registered under the b regulation since the ind classifies persons according to the first stated purpose of residence. nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring at the same time the selected number could also be higher than the actual number of victims that have invoked the b regulation because the ind sometimes mistakenly registers an application for a residence permit on other grounds as a b application. furthermore the selected number includes both victims and witnesses of human trafficking and occasionally the children of victims and witnesses are mista kenly registered as having submitted a b application themselves. it also has to be borne in mind that a b application is not always dealt with in the same year as the ap plication is made. consequently the numbers of b applications and b awards in each year do not cover a cohort and can therefore not be compared with each other. finally it has to be noted that no information is provided to the ind relating to the reflection period offered to victims. number of b applications figure . shows the trend in the annual number of b applications over the period . figure . number of b applications the number of b applications increased almost four fold over the last decade from to . the number of applications rose every year with the exception of a drop in the period . in some years the number rose very steeply in and in others only very slightly in . these b applications are reported as incorrectly entered b application . the ind makes no distinction between them. there are other options in addition to granting or rejecting b applications. for example the b ap plication might be withdrawn by the victim the victim might disappear it might be decided not to start or to halt the investigation or the prosecution nrm . . . there are also the previously mentioned incorrectly entered applications . the numbers only represent initial b applications and awards. applications for extensions of b permits are ignored here. with the exception of and . see under research method earlier in this section. for the table with the detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth in relation to the preceding year see appendix table b . . in nrm the number of b applications in is incorrectly reported as . in of the b applications were ultimately found to have been incorrectly entered. there were therefore actually b applications in that year at most since six of the b applications in were not handled in that year . n um be r year b applications to the immigration and naturalisation service ind non dutch victims reported to comensha data collection and statistical trends in the last two years there has been a steady increase of around a year. since the trend in the number of b applications has followed the trend in the number of non dutch victims registered by comensha. since november forms of cooperation with the police and or the public prosecution service other than the previously required report of human trafficking should be officially regarded as a b ap plication. this is not reflected in the figures. a possible explanation for this is that even before that date the police formally regarded this type of cooperation as an application for b status. number of b awards figure . shows how many b residence permits were granted each year in the last decade. these data cannot be compared with the annual numbers of applications for b status since applications are not all dealt with in the year the application is made. figure . number of b awards the number of b awards increased substantially in the period index figure . . as is to be expected during the shown period the trend was largely the same as for the annual number of b ap plications see figure . . in a record number of b permits were awarded. in that year seven it should be noted that the number of non dutch victims reported to comensha is not directly compa rable with the number of victims who made a b application to the ind if only because the submission of a b application can be preceded by a three month reflection period. information received verbally from the police meeting of the national expert group on human traf ficking lem february not published . with the exception of and . see research method earlier in this section. naturally this also applies for the other data in this section. the numbers represent all b awards even if b status was only granted at a later stage for example after an objection or an appeal procedure in response to initial applications. applications for exten sion of a b residence permit that were granted are not included here. see remarks about the figures earlier in this section. for the table with the detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth in relation to the preceding year see appendix table b . . although the annual number of b applications and b awards do not cover a cohort the vast majority of the applications in a year are also handled in that same year usually by granting b status. n um be r year b awards trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring of the total of applications dealt with were rejected. the grounds on which the applications were rejected are not known. gender of victims granted a b permit figure . shows the distribution by gender of the victims granted b status between and . figure . gender of victims granted b status between and the proportion of male victims granted b status was very small to . the expansion of the human trafficking article in that among other things criminalised exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry probably explains the increase in the number of b awards for male victims from on to . in roughly a fifth of the b awards were for male victims . that corresponds with the rise in the number of male victims of human trafficking reported to comensha in see figure . . age of victims granted b status figure . shows the age distribution of victims granted b status between and . figure . age of victims granted b status if an application is not granted it does not necessarily mean that the application was rejected. the application could also have been dealt with in another way see remarks about the figures earlier in this section . for the table with the detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . see . . and . . . for the table with the detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . year female male year data collection and statistical trends on average at least half of the victims who were granted b status were aged between and . almost of the victims granted b status were older and half of them were between the ages of and . the other victims granted b status almost were minors. there has been a slight shift towards the older age groups between and were younger than in the period and between and were younger than in the period . relatively speaking the number of minors was smallest in . nationality of victims granted b status table . ranks the five most common nationalities of victims granted b status in the last decade. table . ranking of top nationalities of victims granted b status nigerian bulgarian chinese sierra leonean romanian guinean ghanaian hungarian moroccan russian moldavian ukrainian czech source ind databases in and from most b residence permits were granted to victims with the nigerian nationality. prior to the first place had been occupied in at least three years by bulgarians and . russian victims regularly occupied a position in the top at the beginning of the decade but have not done so since . recent newcomers in the annual top are guineans since and ghanaians since . victims who have been granted b status in the last decade have represented a total of different na tionalities excluding the categories unknown and stateless . figure . shows the trend in the top nationalities overall in the period . the top nationalities overall are nigerian bulgarian chinese sierra leonean and romanian see table . last column although these five nationalities do not make up the top in each individual year see table . . among the minors children of victims were occasionally and mistakenly also registered as recipients of b status. in each of the years and one of the registered minors shared a file with an adult victim which is a strong indication of a parent child relationship. for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including all other nationalities the top in each year and the top overall see appendix table b . . for example we can see from figure . that only three of the five nationalities that constitute the top overall appear in jointly accounting for . the top in are nigerian bulgarian trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring figure . trend in the overall top nationalities of victims granted b status the share of b residence permits granted to nigerian victims was more than twice as large in the second half of the decade as in the first half averaging in the period and in compared with an average of in the period . the proportion of bulgarians granted b status actually peaked in the first period with a record of in but has since fallen dramatically to in . in relative terms the number of chinese victims granted b status has been steadily increasing although in the number declined for the first time. the percentage of b residence permits granted to sierra leonean and romanian victims has fluctuated. after almost disappearing from the statistics in the share of b residence permits granted to romanians rose again to in . region of origin of victims granted b status figure . shows the breakdown of victims granted b status by region of origin. figure . region of origin of victims granted b status romanian russian and czech total see appendix table . . only the regions of origin of victims granted b status in the period are shown. for the table with the detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . from a distinc tion is also made in this table between countries within europe that is to say between countries that were member states of the eu in countries that joined the eu in or non eu countries in eastern europe and non eu countries in western europe. year sierra leonean chinese romanian bulgarian nigerian year unknown stateless asia latin america caribbean africa europe data collection and statistical trends most victims granted b status in the last decade came from africa and europe . the remai ning came predominantly from asia . there has been an evident shift over time from europe to africa and asia. up to and including the vast majority between in and in of persons granted b status still came from europe whereas europeans only accounted for in and in . meanwhile africa and asia have become increasingly important regions of origin over the years. latin america and the caribbean only appear occasionally as a region of origin. police regions from which successful b applications are made when a non dutch victim of human trafficking without a legal status in the netherlands reports the crime of human trafficking or otherwise cooperates with the police it is regarded ex officio as an appli cation for a temporary residence permit on the grounds of the b regulation. figures . a and b show the police regions that submitted most b applications to the ind that have led to b awards in and top . figure . a police regions from which successful b applications were made figure . b police regions from which successful b applications were made the b recipients from europe come mainly from the new eu member states and east european coun tries that are not members of the eu see appendix table b . . for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including all other police regions the data for and the top overall see appendix table b . . groningen ro erdam rijnmond amsterdam amstelland drenthe haaglanden other police regions including unknown groningen kennemerland haaglanden friesland ro erdam rijnmond other police regions including unknown trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring over the entire period the haaglanden police region is the region that submitted the largest number of b applications that were granted in the region was still in fifth place but it came first in . haaglanden is closely followed by the amsterdam amstelland police region but that region no longer appeared in the top in . the figures show that the police regions in the top vary over the years as do their relative shares of successful applications although some police regions are represented more consistently than others. for more details see appendix table b . . . . victims and compensation victims of human trafficking can receive compensation for material loss and or emotional injury. one of the possibilities is for the judge to make an order to pay compensation on an application or ex officio separately or in combination with the partial award of the injured party s claim for compensation see . . . if a compensation order is made the compensation is collected for the victim by the central fines collection agency cjib . research method at bnrm s request the cjib has provided data about compensation orders made in human trafficking cases. these are anonymous data at case level in other words cases involving anonymous individuals who have been irrevocably convicted of at least human trafficking. number of compensation orders made figure . shows over the period the trend in the number of cases each year in which a compensation order was made. the number of victims on whose behalf the compensation orders were made is also shown for each year. figure . number of compensation orders made the haaglanden and amsterdam amstelland police regions together accounted for of all b ap plications that were granted in the period see appendix table b . . for a list of the possibilities see nrm pp. et seq. if a claim for compensation is awarded a compensation order is almost always also imposed see nrm . . . however claims for compensation are regularly rejected or declared inadmissible by a judge usually because the claim is manifestly not simple in nature . see nrm . . . when studying the figures it should be borne in mind that the victims on whose behalf a compensa tion order is made represent only a very small proportion of all victims of human trafficking. the cases only reach the cjib when the judgment has become final. this can sometimes be in the same year as the offence was committed but can also be years later. for the table with the detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth in relation to the preceding year see appendix table b . . n um be r year number of cases number of victims concerned data collection and statistical trends in the period from to the number of human trafficking cases in which a final and irrevocable decision had been rendered and the cjib was involved in collecting compensation was between three and five. from the number was significantly higher between nine and cases . most cases of the cases involved a claim for one victim. in all the cases involved victims. compensation orders by amount awarded figure . shows the amounts awarded in compensation orders made by the courts which therefore have to be collected from the convicted person by the cjib. figure . compensation orders by amount awarded the amounts awarded per case not per victim do not generally exceed . compensation orders by disposition figure . shows whether and if so how the compensation orders made during the entire period had been disposed of on the reference date of may . figure . compensation orders by disposition total from for the table with the detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . the method of disposition refers to the final action taken by the cjib whereupon the cjib closes the case. if an alternative custodial sentence has been imposed for example the convicted person is still obliged to pay the victim the compensation ordered by the court. however the cjib is no longer involved. as far as the cjib is concerned the case is closed even though the convicted person has still not paid the amount. for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including the breakdown of the data by year see appendix table b . . year more than other alternative custodial sentence payment in full n.a. open trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring collecting compensation is a time consuming business as is apparent from the large proportion of cases that are still open from earlier years. nevertheless a change for the better can be observed in this regard when these data are compared with the figures bnrm received from the cjib last year. last year there were open cases in the period out of a total of cases while now there are in the period open cases out of a total of . the same positive trend can be seen in the number of cases where payment has been made in full. whereas only of the cases had been settled with payment in full last year compensation had been paid in full in of the cases this year. examples of the occasional cases that fall into the category other might be the barring of a case due to lapse of time or a settlement between the convicted person and the victim. in the last decade a total of cases have been disposed of with an alternative custodial sentence . in these cases the convicted perpetrator has not paid the full compensation and the public prosecution service has ordered that he or she must serve the alternative custodial sentence that the judge imposed at the time of sentencing. the period of custody is not a substitute for the compensation but is intended as a means of exerting pressure. however if this produces no result the cjib s involvement in the matter does end and it is then left to the victim to collect the money. the victim is given a warrant with which he or she can authorise a bailiff to enforce the order but which in fact leaves the victim practically empty handed . compensation orders by amount paid figure . shows the amounts that had been collected in the cases where a compensation order had been made in the period on the reference date of may . figure . compensation orders by amount paid total from the cases where no money has yet been collected might be cases that are still open but could also be cases where for example an alternative custodial sentence had been enforced because it had not been possible to collect some or all of the money. the cases where a sum of money has been collected might the fact that a case is still open does not mean that nothing has been paid. the court might for example decide that the compensation can be paid in installments or the cjib might in certain cases decide to reach a settlement subject to strict conditions . see nrm . . of which cases date from before . there is even one case from and one case from still open. the majority of the open cases are therefore probably cases from the most recent years. for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including the data broken down by year see appendix table b . . data collection and statistical trends be cases that have been disposed of but could also be open cases for example where some of the money has already been paid see the total of open cases and the cases in which nothing has yet been paid in appendix tables b . and b . . . . summary table . presents the key data concerning victims that have been discussed in . in a single table. it should be noted here that the figures come from three different sources comensha ind and cjib and do not cover a cohort so they cannot be compared with each other. table . overview of data on victims total comensha number of victims reported ind number of victims granted a b residence permit cjib number of victims on whose behalf a compensation order has been made victims in the comensha register a total of possible victims of human trafficking were reported to comensha in the period . the annual number has almost trebled in the last decade from to mainly thanks to the growing attention for human trafficking. since when exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry was criminalised male victims have also been reported to comensha. in males actually accounted for of the reported victims compared with to in the period . this increase is partially explained by the large number of men discovered on the asparagus farm in someren. almost of all reported victims in the last decade were aged between and and were minors. the proportion of underage victims in was lower than in the three preceding years between and . dutch victims were reported most frequently in the period . the second most common nationality was nigerian followed by two east european nationalities bulgarian and romanian . chinese victims completed the top . the top nationalities of reported underage victims between and were dutch west afri can nigerian guinean and sierra leonean and chinese in third place . a significantly larger proportion of nigerian victims were underage than among victims of other nationalities in . since the proportion of underage victims has been largest among dutch victims. for almost a third of the victims reported to comensha since it is not known whether they had already been exploited or if they had been exploited in which sector. for at least one tenth of the victims it is at least known that they had not worked and for at least half of them it has been established that they were exploited in the sex industry. in the period at least reported victims were exploited in a sector other than the sex industry of whom in agriculture and trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring horticulture. once again this was due to the possible situation of exploitation discovered at the asparagus farm in someren in . victims are reported to comensha most frequently by the police of all notifications in the last decade . in second place are networks for victims of human trafficking with followed by shel ters with . in three quarters of the notifications of victims requiring shelter came from the police. but they were also reported by the networks for victims of human trafficking and the royal netherlands marechaussee . victims and the b regulation in the period with the exception of and b residence permits were granted to victims. the annual number of b awards has multiplied more than five fold in the last decade from to . in the period a larger proportion of b permits were granted to male victims than in the preceding years to compared with to as a result of the criminalisation of exploita tion in sectors other than the sex industry. male victims actually accounted for of b awards in . on average of those granted b status are aged between and and almost are minors. there has been a slight shift to older age groups over the years. the top nationalities of recipients of b status in the last decade have been nigerian in first place followed at some distance by bulgarian chinese sierra leonean and romanian. over the years the number of recipients of b status from europe has steadily declined and the number from africa and asia has steadily risen. a significant share of successful b applications came from the haaglanden and amsterdam amstelland police regions. victims and compensation there were a total of final and irrevocable judgments in the period in which compensa tion orders were made on behalf of victims of them in the period since . in most cases the compensation was not more than per case not per victim . in of the cases the compensation has been paid in full of the cases are still open and have been disposed of with an alternative custodial sentence. . suspects and offenders this section contains data about persons suspected of human trafficking and persons who have been convicted of the offence in the netherlands. in other words suspects of human trafficking registered by the public prosecution service pps and persons convicted of human trafficking in first instance or on appeal. . the content of this section is based on in other words the known suspects in the netherlands who have been prosecuted following an inves tigation by the police for at least human trafficking. for the reader s convenience in the remainder of this section the term suspects will be used. in other words the known offenders in the netherlands who have been convicted in first instance or on appeal following an investigation by the police and a prosecution by the pps for at least human data collection and statistical trends information from the pps in . . on the prosecution of the suspects and convicted offenders . . on the trial in first instance of the suspects and convicted offenders and in . . on the background characteristics of the suspects and the offenders convicted in first instance information from the research and policy database for judicial documentation objd in . . on the trial on appeal of the suspects and convicted offenders . research method the information in the following subsections . . . . and . . is based largely on the database of the pps pps database a national database containing information from its district offices and the district courts about the prosecution and trial in first instance of suspects and offenders. from the complete database the cases in which at least the offence of human trafficking article a ter a or f of the dutch criminal code was registered can be selected. the secondary analyses of the sub database for human trafficking were performed by the statistical information and policy analysis siba department of the ministry of justice s research and documentation centre wodc at bnrm s request. the same applies for the information from the objd . . . the objd is a database created for the purposes of academic research and to assist in the formulation and monitoring of policy. the database is regularly supplied with information from the judicial documentation system jds . for the explanatory notes to the figures and tables in this section the additional tables in appendix and the applicable statistics see appendix . remarks about the figures the data from the sub database for human trafficking that are presented in this section may not cover all suspects registered by the pps and offenders convicted of a human trafficking offence in first instance because occasionally if the indictment contains multiple offences only the first offence is registered in the pps database. also the data from the pps database are not up to date and are therefore often incomplete. the data in the objd are even more outdated. it is at least six months before the data in the pps database for a particular year can give a fairly reliable impression. the data are reasonably stable after approximately a year although even then some minor changes will still be made at subsequent reference dates. the most recent reliable data available in january therefore were the data for . where possible the data have been supplemented with figures from the pps s annual report for . it also has to be borne in mind that the data do not cover a cohort since cases are not all dealt with by the pps and by the court of first instance and where applicable by the court of appeal in the same year as they are registered by the pps. trafficking. for the reader s convenience in the remainder of this section the term offenders will be used. in fact only the principal offences charged are included in the pps database. however since it is very unlikely that a human trafficking offence will be charged as a subsidiary offence to another offence this is not relevant for the registered human trafficking offences. every year therefore bnrm requests the data from the earlier years on which it has reported in order to analyse them again. information received verbally from wodc. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring finally it should be noted that the pps database and the objd makes no distinction between human trafficking offences involving sexual exploitation and human trafficking offences involving other forms of exploitation. compas the current registration system used to supply data for the pps database will shortly be entirely replaced by the new gps system. the rapporteur has requested and in the fifth and seventh reports recommended that this distinction be made in the new system. . . prosecution number of human trafficking cases registered by the pps figure . shows the trend in the number of human trafficking cases against individual suspects regis tered annually by the pps in the period . figure . number of cases registered by the pps the number of cases registered by the pps in the period covered was . the number of cases registered annually remained fairly stable during this ten year period from in to in . the figure shows a heavily fluctuating pattern with a decline in one year alternating with an in crease in the next. the number of cases only increased over successive years in and producing the record number of registered cases in . the number of cases fell in and continued to decline in to around the level in according to the pps s annual report. nrm recommendation nrm recommendation . for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth in relation to the preceding year see appendix table b . . according to the pps there were registered human trafficking cases public prosecution service annual report . the numbers for inflow pps for presented in the annual report dif fer slightly from the numbers in figure . and the accompanying table b . in appendix . this is probably the result of the use of different reference dates. year a an ta l number of human tra cking cases registered by the pps data collection and statistical trends registered cases involving underage victims figure . shows the percentage in each year and for the period of all the human traf ficking cases registered in a year in which as far as is known one or more underage victims were involved. figure . registered cases involving underage victims an average of of the registered cases involved at least one underage victim in the period . the figure fluctuated over the nine years being at least in and with a record of in and between and in the other four years. registered cases by court district figure . shows the percentage of cases registered by each of the district offices of the pps during the entire period . the number of human trafficking cases involving underage victims is not indicative of the total number of underage victims involved since there could have been more than one victim in each case. criterion registration under article and section numbers that imply that the victims were underaged. in the dutch criminal code those are section and section of article ter section and and section of article a and section and section and section of article a f. however underage victims could also be involved in cases registered under other sections and subsections of those articles see nrm . . so the number is almost certainly underestimated. for the table with the detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including the breakdown of the figures for the other eight district offices the top each year and the top overall see appendix table b . . year human tra cking cases registered by the pps with underage victims trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring figure . registered cases by court district total from the district office in amsterdam registered the largest number of human trafficking cases in the nine year period n closely followed by the hague with cases. the other offices in the top were rotterdam n den bosch and zwolle . the offices in assen middelburg and dordrecht registered the smallest number of cases between and each accounting for just and they like maastricht and zutphen did not appear in the top in any of the nine years. the office in utrecht appeared in the top for the first time in . each office s share of the total number of cases fluctuated over the years. in this context there was a noteworthy trend in the rotterdam office. whereas that office was never in the top five in the period with a maximum of in from it was in the top five every year between and and in first place twice and . this trend is probably connected with the establishment of the rotterdam prostitution human trafficking team in may . naturally it goes without saying that the number of registered cases is not determined exclusively by the efforts of the office in a particular district. nature of the registered cases figure . gives a breakdown of the human trafficking cases registered by the pps according to the dif ferent sections of the human trafficking provision in the dutch criminal code by year over the period . the majority of the registered human trafficking cases over the entire period involved aggravated human trafficking articles ter a a f and . most of those cases involved human trafficking committed in concert or human trafficking involving a victim below the age of articles ter a and a f . there were very few cases involving both of these aggravating cir this also means that some district courts have very little experience with human trafficking cases. see appendix table . . the differences in the number of cases in each district office are undoubtedly connected with dif ferences in the size of the districts. however there are other possible explanations the differences could be connected with the efforts and the management structure in the area of investigation and prosecution or with the number of cases of human trafficking that actually occur in a district perhaps also in connection with the geographic and demographic features of the district. however there is no reliable information about this so that it is only possible to speculate about the real reason. for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . the hague ro erdam amsterdam den bosch zwolle arnhem utrecht almelo groningen leeuwarden haarlem other court districts data collection and statistical trends cumstances article a f or human trafficking leading to serious physical injury article a f only twelve and seven cases respectively during the nine year period. there were no registered cases of human trafficking leading to another person s death article a f in the period . figure . nature of the registered cases the proportion of cases involving aggravated human trafficking has declined significantly over time. whereas in almost all registered cases involved aggravated human trafficking in the percentage was only just over half of all cases in the period to and in the period to . the reason for this trend is not entirely clear. registered cases by most serious offence human trafficking is often committed in combination with other offences so a case can involve mul tiple offences. figure . presents an overview of the most serious offence charged in each registered human trafficking case. the most serious offence is the offence that carries the heaviest maximum sentence. . the term does not imply a qualitative judgment of the offence. human trafficking was the only offence or the most serious registered offence in more than of the cases in the period aggravated in of the cases and non aggravated in . the percen tage of cases in which aggravated human trafficking is the most serious offence has declined over time from in to in while non aggravated human trafficking has been the most serious offence in a growing proportion of cases in to in . in cases where there were charges for another more serious offence in addition to human trafficking that offence was usually a form of sexual violence of the total in the nine year period . sexual violence was the most serious charge in it would be interesting to investigate what the ratio between non aggravated human trafficking and aggravated human trafficking is for cases in which a summons was issued. those figures are not avai lable however. for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . in the event of a combination of offences with the same maximum sentence human trafficking is deemed the most serious offence. if there are then still multiple offences with the same maximum sentence the offence committed first prevails. year a f section a f section a f section ter a section a f section ter a section trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring cases in . human trafficking may be the most serious registered offence in more cases in the future as a result of the raising of the maximum sentences from july see . . . figure . registered cases by most serious offence registered cases and preventive custody figure . shows the percentage of cases registered by the pps in which the suspects were detained in preventive custody at any time for the period . it is important to note that this does not mean that a suspect was still in preventive custody at the time of the trial. figure . registered cases and preventive custody on average suspects were held in preventive custody in of all cases. this proportion did not change much from year to year the range is small from a minimum of to a maximum of . although the suspects were all charged at least with the serious offence of human trafficking almost a quarter were not held in preventive custody. since preventive custody is sometimes suspended or lifted an even for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . preventive custody may be suspended or lifted in the meantime. these data therefore do not give any indication of the proportion of suspects who were still in preventive custody at the time of the judgment. year other o ences other violence sexual violence non aggravated human tra cking aggravated human tra cking year not in pre trial custody in pre trial custody data collection and statistical trends greater proportion will not have been in preventive custody at the time of the trial. the possibilities for applying preventive custody have increased since the maximum sentences for human trafficking offences were raised from july . number of human trafficking cases dealt with by the pps figure . shows the trend in the number of cases dealt with by the pps in the ten year period. the number of cases registered and the number of cases dealt with in any one year do not cover a cohort so the numbers cannot be compared with each other. figure . number of cases dealt with by the pps the pps dealt with a total of human trafficking cases in the period . the number of cases dealt with annually more than doubled over that period from in to in . the number rose almost every year although the size of the increase compared with the preceding year ranged from just in to an enormous jump of in which produced the record number of cases being dealt with in that year. the number of cases dealt with fell for the first time in by compared with the preceding year and then again in although less dramatically . according to the pps s annual report the number of cases dealt with declined again in to roughly the level of . cases dealt with by the pps by disposition of the case figure . shows the disposition of cases by the pps in the period . transfer of jurisdiction refers to the transfer of a case to another district in the netherlands or to another country. bnrm proposes conducting research in the future into the system of preventive custody. for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth in relation to the preceding year see appendix table b . . see under remarks about the figures earlier in this section. according to the pps human trafficking cases were dealt with in public prosecution service annual report . the numbers for outflow pps for presented in the annual report dif fer slightly from the numbers in figure . and the accompanying table b . in appendix . this is probably due to the use of different reference dates. for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . n um be r year number of human tra cking cases dealt with by the pps trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring figure . cases dealt with by the pps by disposition the most common method of disposition of a case was issuing a summons in of the cases over the nine years . in the majority of cases a summons was issued for offences including human trafficking and sometimes only for offences other than human trafficking . after the record of issued summons in in of the cases this figure fell again to in . at the same time the num ber of cases involving unconditional decisions not to prosecute rose in from in the smal lest percentage in the nine year period to in . this reversed a steady gradual decline since in the proportion of unconditional decisions not to prosecute with the exception of when there was an increase of compared with . over the nine year period there were unconditional decisions not to prosecute. of these were taken on technical grounds in dutch technische sepots and were on the basis of policy waivers in dutch beleidssepots . in policy waivers accounted for of decisions not to prosecute a higher than average proportion and a particularly striking increase in relation to the two preceding years in and in . the other methods of disposition were scarcely ever used. when the figures on summonses for at least human trafficking presented here and in appendix table b. . are compared with the figures for of which summons for in the pps s annual report for the data do not correspond. this is probably mainly the result of the use of different selection criteria. for example the pps s selection was probably based on registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons even if charges were only brought for offences other than human trafficking while the wodc siba department based its selection at bnrm s request on registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons that at least included human trafficking. in of the involving an unconditional decision not to prosecute the grounds for the decision were not registered and are therefore unknown. it should be noted with respect to joinder as a method of disposition that the pps data do not show whether a joinder was ad informandum or for trial . joinder for trial means that a summons is issued for the offences in one case in the same indictment as the offences in another case with a different cause list number . a joinder for trial therefore represents the disposition of a case by summons. where a case is joined ad informandum no charges are brought but the case is joined with another case so that the judge can also take the joined case into account in determining the sentence. the judge can only take the joined case into account if the suspect admits the offence. year conditional decision not to prosecute joinder out of court se lement transfer of jurisdiction unconditional decision not to prosecute summons only for other o ences summons for o ences including human tra cking data collection and statistical trends . . trial number of human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance figure . shows the trend in the number of cases dealt with in first instance in the period . figure . number of cases dealt with in first instance the number of human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance each year almost doubled in the nine years from in to in . in the first four years of the period covered the number of cases increased every year and at a steadily faster rate before peaking in . the number of cases dealt with then declined in and before rising again in the last two years shown. the steepest increase in the nine year period occurred in producing a record number of cases dealt with one more than in . cases dealt with in first instance by disposition figure . shows the decisions made by the court of first instance in the cases dealt with in the period . on average of the human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance ended in a conviction for at least human trafficking. in of the cases the defendants were acquitted of human trafficking ended in a conviction only for offences other than human trafficking and in a complete acquittal . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth compared with the preceding year see appendix table b . . for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . note however that even within this there might have been acquittals on charges of human traf ficking since if one charge of human trafficking is declared proven there is a conviction for at least human trafficking. at the same time it is then possible that the suspect was acquitted on the other charges of human trafficking. n um be r year number of custodial sentences imposed number of convictions for human tra cking number of human tra cking cases dealt with in rst instance trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring figure . cases dealt with in first instance by disposition broadly speaking there has generally been a decline in the proportion of convictions for human traf ficking during the period covered. whereas in and there were convictions in and of the cases respectively the figure was only in and just in . at the same time there has been a steady increase in the proportion of cases in which there was no conviction for human traffic king convictions only for offences other than human trafficking and complete acquittals since . other judicial decisions have been rendered only sporadically together representing of the total . appendix table b . presents a breakdown of the disposition of the cases in first instance according to the most serious offence charged. figure . shows that the trend in the number of convictions for at least human trafficking up to and including was roughly the same as the trend in the number of human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance. in and however the number of convictions for at least human trafficking rose far more slowly in absolute terms than the number of cases dealt with. this corresponds with figure . which shows that the number of convictions for at least human trafficking declined in relative terms in relation to the total number of cases dealt with in first instance in and . a partial explanation for this might be that since the end of there have also been prosecutions for exploita tion outside the sex industry other forms of exploitation cases which often involved relatively large numbers of suspects see . . . the case law on these forms of exploitation is still evolving. until the end of these cases ended relatively frequently in acquittals see . . . when the figures on convictions for at least human trafficking here and in appendix table b. . are compared with the figures for convictions for in the pps s annual report for the data do not correspond. this is probably mainly due to the use of different selection criteria. for example the pps s selection was probably based on registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons even if charges were only brought for offences other than human trafficking and then led to a convic tion even if there was only a conviction for offences other than human trafficking while the wodc siba department based its selection at bnrm s request on registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons for at least human trafficking and then led to a conviction for at least human trafficking. and . for the interpretation of this table see the explanation in the footnote to table b. . in appendix . unfortunately the text of article a f makes it impossible to give an impression on the grounds of sections and subsections of the nature of the exploitation in the sex industry in other economic sectors or in relation to the removal of organs . year prosecution declared inadmissible discharge from further prosecution other decisions cases joined at trial acqui al conviction only for other o ences conviction for o ences including human tra cking data collection and statistical trends nature of the convictions in first instance figure . presents a breakdown of the convictions for human trafficking in first instance by convicti ons for non aggravated and for aggravated human trafficking by year over the period . figure . nature of the convictions in first instance on average in of the cases in which there were convictions for at least human trafficking aggravated human trafficking was declared proven. with convictions for aggravated human trafficking in of the cases in and only in of the cases in the figure shows a downward trend. the percen tage of convictions for aggravated human trafficking has however also risen in some years during the nine year period in and . the trend shown here corresponds with the decline in the proportion of cases involving aggravated human trafficking among the cases registered by the pps see figure . . a reservation has to be made here. from the survey of the case law on sexual exploitation in for example it emerged that no indictment ever included the aggravating circumstance of the involvement of a victim below the age of although it was clear from eleven of the judgments that there was a victim younger than involved. convictions in first instance by sentence imposed figure . provides an overview of the punishments that were imposed in the cases in which there was a conviction for at least human trafficking between and . custodial sentences were imposed on average in of the cases in which there was a conviction for at least human trafficking. community service was the principal sentence in of the cases. custodial sentences accounted for between and of all sentences between and and between and in the period . although the proportion of convictions for human trafficking declined over the nine years the relative frequency with which custodial sentences were imposed increased. in other words where there were aggravating circumstances. for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . see nrm p. . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including a breakdown into non aggravated and aggravated human trafficking see appendix table . . year conviction for non aggravated human tra cking conviction for aggravated human tra cking trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring figure . convictions by sentence imposed figure . shows the same trend in the number of custodial sentences imposed for convictions for at least human trafficking as in the number of convictions for human trafficking in the period . this figure also shows a steady convergence in absolute terms of the number of custodial sentences imposed and the number of convictions for human trafficking. this corresponds with figure . in which it can be seen that during the nine year period the proportion of custodial sentences increased to more than in relation to the total number of convictions in relative terms . custodial sentences imposed in first instance by length of sentence figure . provides an overview of the length of the custodial sentences imposed in cases in which defendants were convicted of at least human trafficking between and . figure . custodial sentences by length of sentence on average of custodial sentences imposed in first instance for at least human trafficking were for a term of up to one year. more than half of the custodial sentences were for between one and four years and only were for more than four years. for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including a breakdown by aggravated and non aggravated human trafficking see appendix table b . . year no principal sentence only conditional sentence fine community service custodial sentence year more than years to years up to year data collection and statistical trends the figure implies a trend towards shorter custodial sentences in the period . whereas in only of the custodial sentences were for a term of up to one year that applied for of the sentences in . custodial sentences of more than four years have become steadily less common in relative terms from in to in a trend that is at odds with the current perception of the seriousness of the offence of human trafficking which led to the raising of the statutory maximum sentences in . cases dealt with in first instance in which appeals were filed figure . shows the annual trend in the percentage of all cases dealt with in first instance in which an appeal was filed over the period . it also shows which party filed the appeal. figure . cases dealt with in first instance in which an appeal was filed appeals were filed in of the cases dealt with in first instance in the period . the appeal was usually filed by the suspect or also by the suspect total . the proportion of cases in which a judgment was appealed fluctuated over the years ranging from in to in . the percentage of cases in which a decision was appealed only by the pps ranged from in to in with an average of . this is impossible to state with certainty since the length of the custodial sentences is divided into ca tegories. for example it is possible that in one year the average length of the custodial sentences that fall into the category years is slightly longer than one year while in another year the average length of the sentences in this category is almost four years. that does not apply here however. the average custodial sentence imposed each year since . sd . . sd . . sd . is shorter than the average custodial sentence imposed over the entire nine years . days sd . . also note that the custodial sentences are imposed for the total of offences that are declared proven in one case so sometimes also for other offences than human trafficking . for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . the proportion of all cases where the pps filed an appeal alone or together with the suspect ranged from in to in with an average of . because the pps database makes no distinction between human trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation and human trafficking for the purpose of exploitation in sectors other than the sex indus try it is impossible to ascertain whether the pps appeals more often in cases involving exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. year by both parties only by the suspect only by the pps trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring number of human trafficking cases dealt with on appeal figure . shows the trend in the number of human trafficking cases heard on appeal in the period . figure . number of cases dealt with on appeal the first thing to note is that the impression created by the steep drop in the number of appeals in is probably unreliable since there is a considerable delay in the registration of appeal cases in the objd. consequently the number of cases in will probably be higher at a later reference date see under remarks about the figures earlier in this section . in the period covered at least human trafficking cases were heard on appeal. the annual number of human trafficking cases dealt with on appeal varied over the nine years from nine in to in . the largest year on year increase was in . as figure . shows only a small number of human trafficking cases are dealt with on appeal each year. it has therefore been decided not to present figures for each individual year but for two periods and . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth compared with the preceding year see appendix table b . . although the inflow the cases in first instance in which an appeal was filed and the outflow the cases dealt with on appeal do not cover a cohort and therefore cannot be compared the difference between the inflow of cases and the outflow of cases over the entire period is re markable particularly since the inflow has been corrected for the cases in which the appeal was wit hdrawn information received verbally from wodc . this discrepancy might be explained by a backlog in the disposition of cases on appeal or alternatively a backlog in the registration of cases in the objd in comparison with the pps s data see under remarks about the figures earlier in this section . note however that these are periods of five years and four years so while the appeal cases dealt with in the two periods can be compared in relative terms they cannot be properly compared in absolute terms. year number of cases dealt with on appeal data collection and statistical trends cases dealt with on appeal by disposition figure . shows the decisions of the courts of appeal in the human trafficking cases dealt with in the two relevant periods. figure . cases dealt with on appeal by disposition and on average the vast majority of appeals ended in a conviction for at least human trafficking. in the other of the cases there were acquittals and a few cases in which the prosecution was declared inadmissible. the proportion of convictions was slightly higher in the period by than in the period . table b . in appendix presents a breakdown of the disposition of cases on appeal according to the most serious offence charged. convictions on appeal by sentence imposed figure . shows the sentences that were imposed in the human trafficking cases in which there were convictions for at least human trafficking on appeal in the two defined periods. figure . convictions on appeal by sentence imposed and there were actually appeal cases dealt with see appendix table b . . however two judgments are missing and therefore no further details about them are available to report. for the table with s detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . for the interpretation of this table see the explanation in the footnote to table . in appendix . for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . period acqui al prosecution declared inadmissible conviction period community service only conditional sentence fine unconditional custodial sentence trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring custodial sentences were imposed in of the cases in which there was a conviction for at least human trafficking in the period . in of the cases the principal punishment was a community service order. it is interesting to note that all four conditional sentences and the three fines were imposed in the period . however these were incidental cases and one should not attach too much significance to them. custodial sentences imposed on appeal by length of sentence figure . shows the length of the custodial sentences imposed in the human trafficking cases in which a custodial sentence was imposed on appeal for at least human trafficking. figure . custodial sentences imposed on appeal by length of sentence and on average a third of the custodial sentences imposed on appeal in cases in which there was a conviction for at least human trafficking were for a term of up to one year. almost half of the sentences were for terms of imprisonment of between one and four years and roughly a fifth were for a period of more than four years. when the periods and are compared there is as in the case of sentences in first instance an evident trend towards shorter custodial sentences. in of the custodial sentences were for terms of up to one year compared with in the period . at the same time the severest custodial sentences of more than four years were imposed slightly less often in and in . for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . this is impossible to state with certainty since the length of the custodial sentences is divided into categories. for example it is possible that the average length of the custodial sentences in the category years in one year is slightly longer than one year while the average length of the sentences in this category is almost four years in another year. the average duration of the imposed custodial sentences on appeal are not available. also note that the custodial sentences are imposed for the total of offences that are declared proven in one case so sometimes also for other offences than human trafficking . period to years up to year more than years data collection and statistical trends . . characteristics number of suspects and offenders naturally the trend in the number of suspected human traffickers registered by the pps each year in the period is the same as the trend in the number of human trafficking cases against individual suspects registered annually by the pps in the same period. the graph line in figure . is therefore the same as in figure . . figure . shows the trend in the number of offenders convicted in first instance annually over the period . figure . number of suspects registered by the pps the number of suspects registered annually by the pps has fluctuated sharply between in and in but has remained roughly stable over the period as a whole from in to in . after peaking in the number declined in and that decline continued in according to the pps s annual report. figure . number of offenders convicted in first instance for the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth compared with the preceding year see appendix table . . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including index figures and the relative growth compared with the preceding year see appendix table b . . according to the pps there were registered suspects of human trafficking in public prosecu tion service annual report . the numbers for inflow pps for presented in the pps s annual report differ slightly from the number in figure . and the accompanying table b . in appendix . this is probably the result of the use of different reference dates. n um be r year number of suspects registered by the pps n um be r year number of o enders convicted in rst instance trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring the figure showing the trend in the number of persons convicted in first instance each year displays a totally different pattern. the number of convicted offenders increased slightly from to in the period . the overall range is not very wide between and with the exception of when there was a relative increase of compared with yielding a peak of convicted persons. in and there was a gradual increase in absolute terms although in relative terms the opposite was true see figure . . gender of suspects and offenders figure . shows the distribution by gender of the suspects who were registered by the pps in the period . figure . shows the same distribution for offenders who were convicted in first instance. figure . gender of suspects the large majority of the suspects over the nine year period were male . the proportion of female suspects declined gradually with slight fluctuations over this period from in to in . the female suspects in came from hungary six the netherlands four china three bulga ria two nigeria two and australia belgium brazil the philippines india morocco mongolia the netherlands antilles poland romania sierra leone the former soviet union thailand the former czechoslovakia and vietnam one each . there was a similar trend among convicted offenders. the vast majority were male in the period and the proportion of female offenders gradually declined with fluctuations over the years from in to in . the eight women in came from the netherlands three hungary two and the netherlands antilles romania and the former soviet union one each . when the figures on convicted persons presented here are compared with the figures for convictions for in the pps s annual report for the data do not correspond. this is probably mainly the result of the use of different selection criteria. for example the pps probably made its selection on the basis of registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons even if charges were only brought for offences other than human trafficking and then led to a conviction even if there was only a conviction for offences other than human trafficking while the wodc siba department made its selection at bnrm s request on registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons for at least human trafficking and then led to a conviction for at least human trafficking. for the tables with the detailed overviews of these data see appendix table b . and table b . . year unknown n.a. legal entity male suspects female suspects data collection and statistical trends figure . gender of convicted offenders age of suspects and convicted offenders figure . shows the age distribution of the suspects registered by the pps in the period . fi gure . shows the same distribution for offenders convicted in first instance. it refers to the age at the time of the first human trafficking offence according to the indictment or in the case of the convicted offenders the first human trafficking offence for which the offender was convicted. figure . age of suspects on average more than half of the suspects were younger than . the age group is the largest in every year between and with the exception of and when the age group was most heavily represented and respectively . the proportion of underage suspects ranged from in and to in and . the average age of the suspects over the nine year period was . fluctuating between . in and . in the average age in was . . the average age was . for male suspects and . for female suspects. for the tables with a detailed overviews of these data see appendix tables b . and b . . for the table with a detailed overviews of these data see appendix table b . . sd . . sd . . year unknown male o enders female o enders year unknown n.a. legal entity younger than trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring figure . age of convicted offenders the majority of convicted offenders were also younger than . the age group is usually the most heavily represented although it was an older age group in and . the proportion of underage convicted offenders ranged from in to in with in . the average age of convicted offenders was . in the period . after rising erratically between and from . to . on average the average age of convicted offenders declined every year with the exception of to . in . the average age was . for male offenders and . for female offenders. country of birth of suspects table . shows the ranking of the five most common countries of birth of suspects registered by the pps over the nine year period. see appendix table b . . for the table with a detailed overview of these data see appendix table b . . sd . . sd . . year unknown younger than table . ranking of top countries of birth of suspects netherlands turkey bulgaria romania morocco hungary nigeria surinam former soviet union albania former yugoslavia source pps database reference date january data collection and statistical trends the netherlands ranks first among the countries of birth of suspects every year. apart from the nether lands turkey is the only other country to appear in the top every year including three times in second place. in however turkey occupied fifth place for the first time. hungary returned to the annual top in after previously sharing fourth place in while in that year for the first time since romania no longer appeared in the top . the suspects registered by the pps in the period were born in a total of different countries excluding the categories n.a. and unknown . figure . shows the trend in the top countries of birth of suspects over the entire nine year period . . the top countries of birth overall were the netherlands turkey bulgaria romania and morocco see table . last column but they did not constitute the top in each individual year see table . columns . figure . trend in the overall top countries of birth of suspects the proportion of suspects born in the netherlands has increased slightly over the nine year period with fluctuations from in to in on average they represent of all suspects. the proportion of suspects whose country of birth was turkey has ranged from a minimum of in to a maximum of in . after peaking in between and bulgaria accounted for between and of the suspects in the period . since the proportion of suspects born in romania has steadily declined reaching in the same percentage as in . the share of suspects born in morocco has fluctuated around an average of . country of birth of convicted offenders table . shows the annual ranking of the five most common countries of birth of offenders convicted in first instance in the period . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including all other countries of birth the top in each year and the top overall see appendix table b . . looking at in figure . for example. the five countries of birth that occupy the top overall ac count for of the suspects registered by the pps in while the top for just consisting of the netherlands former yugoslavia bulgaria turkey and the former soviet union accounts for of the suspects registered by the pps see appendix table . . year morocco romania bulgaria turkey the netherlands trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table . ranking of top countries of birth of convicted offenders netherlands bulgaria turkey romania morocco netherlands antilles hungary surinam former czechoslovakia former soviet union albania former yugoslavia nigeria ghana belgium source pps database reference date january the top countries of birth of convicted offenders are the same as those for suspects. however bulgaria rather than turkey occupies second place. a noteworthy newcomer as an important country of birth of offenders since is the netherlands antilles. as in the case of suspects hungary reappeared in the top in . the offenders convicted in first instance in the period were born in a total of different countries excluding the category unknown . figure . shows the trend in the top countries of birth of offenders over the entire nine year period . the top countries of birth overall were the netherlands bulgaria turkey romania and morocco see table . last column but they did not constitute the top in each individual year see table . columns . it is noteworthy that the netherlands antilles did not appear in the top for suspects in nine years. this needs to be qualified however since in and it occupied fourth and third place with only four and six offenders respectively. for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data including all other countries of birth the top in each year and the top overall see appendix table b . . looking at in figure . for example. the five countries of birth that occupy the top overall account for of the offenders convicted in first instance in while the top for just consisting of the netherlands former yugoslavia the former soviet union nigeria and ghana accounts for of the offenders convicted in first instance see appendix table . . data collection and statistical trends figure . trend in overall top countries of birth of convicted offenders in the period the proportion of offenders born in the netherlands rose from in to in which represents an average of the same as with suspects . after fluctuating between and for three years the proportion of bulgarian born offenders suddenly increased to in . turkey was the country of birth of between and of the offenders in and which was less than in the five previous years. the percentage of romanian offenders varies greatly each year ranging between and . the number of offenders born in morocco has fluctuated slightly each year between and with the exception of and in particular when the country accounted for the remarkably large proportion of . . . summary table . next page consolidates the key data from the statistics discussed in . concerning suspects and convicted offenders in a single table. it should be noted that the data come from two different sources pps and objd and do not usually cover a cohort. the data presented in a particular row can be compared. as has been regularly mentioned the number of cases registered annually by the pps cannot be compa red with the number of cases dealt with by it because not all the cases are dealt with in the same year that they are registered . but that does not apply to the same extent for the total numbers of cases registered and dealt with over the entire period . accordingly the totals of cases registered and cases dealt with by the pps are close. the same applies for the total number of cases in which a sum mons was issued and the number dealt with in first instance compared with . in this context a noteworthy comparison is that between the total number of cases in which an appeal was filed in first instance corrected for the cases in which the appeal was withdrawn and the cases dealt with on ap peal compared with . possible explanations for the discrepancy are that there is a backlog in the disposition of cases on appeal or that the registration in objd lags behind the pps database. information provided verbally by the wodc. year morocco romania turkey bulgaria the netherlands trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring cases registered by the pps a total of cases in which there was a suspicion of at least human trafficking were registered by the pps in the period . the number of registered cases fluctuated greatly from one year to another but remained roughly the same over the ten year period from in to in . the following information covers the period and thus a total of cases. the proportion of registered cases involving at least one underage victim varied from one year to another between and and averaged . of the pps s district offices the offices in amsterdam the hague and rotterdam registered an average of of all human trafficking cases. the rotterdam office owes its position in the top mainly to the number of cases it has registered since the number has increased sharply pro bably as a result of the establishment of the rotterdam prostitution human trafficking team in that year. according to the pps s annual report for there were registered cases in which brings the total to . according to the pps s annual report for there were cases dealt with in which brings the total to . this is not equal to the sum of the cases dealt with on appeal in the period and the number of cases dealt with on appeal in the period since two judgments are missing and no infor mation is available about them. table . overview of data on suspects and offenders number of cases totaal n n n n n n n n n n cases registered by pps cases dealt with by pps with summons incl. human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance with conviction incl. human trafficking with custodial sentence after conviction appeal filed cases dealt with on appeal with conviction incl. human trafficking with custodial sentence after conviction data collection and statistical trends most registered cases concern forms of aggravated human trafficking an average of . however that percentage has declined sharply over the nine years from to . human trafficking is the only offence or the most serious offence in terms of the maximum sen tence in most of the registered cases . among these cases the proportion of aggravated human trafficking cases has declined from to over the nine years and the proportion of non aggravated human trafficking cases has increased from to . sexual violence was registered as the most serious offence in of all registered cases. in of the registered cases the suspect was detained in preventive custody at some point in time. cases dealt with by the pps in the period the pps dealt with cases involving a suspicion of at least human traf ficking. the number of cases dealt with annually has more than doubled in ten years from in to in . the following information covers the period and thus a total of cases. n of the cases were dealt with by a summons for human trafficking alone or in combina tion with other offences. in of the cases there was an unconditional decision not to prosecute and in a fifth of those cases the decisions were based on policy waivers. cases dealt with in first instance a total of cases that included charges of at least human trafficking were dealt with in first instance in the period . the number of cases dealt with annually has almost doubled in the nine years from in to in . table . overview of data on suspects and offenders number of cases totaal n n n n n n n n n n cases registered by pps cases dealt with by pps with summons incl. human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance with conviction incl. human trafficking with custodial sentence after conviction appeal filed cases dealt with on appeal with conviction incl. human trafficking with custodial sentence after conviction trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring on average n of the cases dealt with in first instance led to a conviction for at least hu man trafficking. the trend over the entire period was as follows the proportion of convictions for at least human trafficking declined sharply from in to in while at the same time the percentage of acquittals on charges of human trafficking increased from in to in . a partial explanation for this could be that since the end of there have also been prosecutions for exploitation outside the sex industry other forms of exploitation cases that often involve a relatively large number of suspects . the case law on these forms of exploitation is still evolving. until the end of these cases relatively frequently ended in acquittals. on average aggravated human trafficking was declared proven in of the cases in which there was a conviction for at least human trafficking compared with of cases in which non aggravated human trafficking was declared proven . over the entire period the proportion of cases in which aggravated human trafficking was declared proven has declined from in to in . custodial sentences were imposed in the vast majority of cases in which there were convictions for human trafficking . these sentences have been even more common in the period since between and . if a custodial sentence was imposed in a case in which there was a conviction for at least human trafficking it was mainly for a period of one to four years . sentences of less than a year were imposed in of cases and sentences of more than four years in just . the custodial sentences imposed have become steadily shorter which contrasts with current perceptions of the seriousness of the offence of human trafficking which led to the increase in the maximum sentences from july . appeals were filed in of the cases dealt with in first instance usually by the suspect alone or by the suspect and the pps. cases dealt with on appeal a total of cases in which the charges included human trafficking were dealt with on appeal in the period . in of the cases there was a conviction for at least human trafficking. the convictions usually resulted in a custodial sentence. a third of the custodial sentences were for a term of up to one year and a fifth for a term of more than four years. the other custodial sentences were for terms of between one and four years. as in cases dealt with in first instance there has been an apparent trend towards shorter custodial sentences in appeal cases. characteristics on average of the suspects and of the convicted offenders were male and more than half of both suspects and convicted offenders were below the age of including an average of minors in the period . the top countries of birth of the suspects and convicted offenders were the netherlands turkey bulgaria romania and morocco although the order was slightly different in the ranking for convicted offenders. the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the netherlands ten years on recommendations the previous chapters have reviewed developments in efforts in the fight against human trafficking in the netherlands and the results of the work of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the ten years since the position was created in the netherlands. that review yielded a qualitative and quantitative overview of the issues that arose in relation to efforts to combat human trafficking during that period and how they have been addressed. as regards the role of the rapporteur the focus was on the recommendations she has made and the effects they have had. the effectiveness of an independent rapporteur depends to a large extent on the degree to which the recommendations produced results. most of the rapporteur s recommendations have been closely connected with practical issues. it is easy to see the extent to which those recommendations have been adopted and have led to improvements. other recommendations have been of a more fundamental nature and have contributed more to the development of a vision. recommendations incorporate commentary on policies and their implemen tation and have an impact when the comments are understood and subsequently play a role in decision making processes. that has generally been the case in the last decade. for example the rapporteur s recommendations concerning immigration policy have largely been translated into improvements in rules and policies. recommendations concerning the care for victims have slowly but surely led to care being tailored more closely to the specific needs of victims of human trafficking and to serious efforts to eliminate shortages of capacity. in the field of investigation and prosecution professionalism has increased in many areas although capacity and prioritisation remain persistent problems. the recommendations concerning prevention awareness and identification of victims have also produced results. it is not only the recommendations that have an impact. the rapporteur also brings about improve ments by initiating discussion of subjects and by conducting her own research. the study of case law on exploitation in the sex industry in the seventh report for example has led to growing attention to the subject in the judiciary. in view of the priority given to tackling human trafficking in the netherlands in her recommendations the rapporteur has repeatedly drawn attention to the need to make sufficient realistic capacity available for the relevant organisations. this is a point that still demands attention. although capacity is not a goal in itself it is always important to enquire whether the policy objectives formulated in this impor tant domain can be achieved with the resources available. naturally identification attitude awareness and training also play a prominent role in this context. the recommendations have generated a lot of attention for these aspects too in the last ten years. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring there have been a number of other recurring themes in the rapporteur s interventions. one important topic has been to foster the realisation that human trafficking is not confined to exploitation in the sex industry but also occurs in other sectors summed up as other forms of exploitation . this was the rea son why even before the office of rapporteur was created there were calls for a rapporteur on human traf ficking and not just trafficking in women. since the expansion of the criminalisation of human trafficking to other forms of exploitation the rapporteur has repeatedly observed that dutch legislation makes no distinction between exploitation in the sex industry and in other sectors and that in principle the seriousness of the exploitation does not depend on the sector in which it occurs. the rapporteur has also drawn attention to the importance of a comprehensive policy one that is not confined to arranging care for victims but also encompasses the investigation and prosecution of of fenders based on the notion that the two approaches are inseparable and can only be effective in com bination. by extension the rapporteur has also helped to secure recognition of the fact that human trafficking is sometimes manifested as a form of organised crime and should be dealt with appropriately when the situation arises. the rapporteur has constantly stressed the importance of cooperation and the exchange of information in the anti trafficking chain. this importance has certainly grown in the netherlands and has been put into practice but chain cooperation is still fragile. to remain effective cooperation needs maintenance a con stant effort to maintain the involvement of all the partners in the chain if necessary by providing direction. as well as highlighting the fact that aliens without residence status should be treated as possible victims if there is even the slightest indication of human trafficking the rapporteur has constantly drawn atten tion to the fact that human trafficking can also occur solely within national borders and that underage domestic victims in particular require special care. a number of recommendations have related to the regulation of the prostitution sector. in the netherlands adopted an exceptional position in international terms on the regulation of the prosti tution sector by lifting the ban on brothels and opting for a more regulatory approach to prostitution. this approach was based in part on the idea that the profession of prostitution could be normalised. one of the factors behind this decision was the view that entering the profession was an individual s free choice that should be respected. this may have obscured the sight of forced prostitution especially since establishing a licensing system for the prostitution sector was expected to make licensed prostitution more manageable and hence lead to eradication of abuses in the sector. over the last decade the emp hasis in attitudes towards the prostitution sector seems to have shifted to the vulnerability of the sector to human trafficking. several notorious cases that have shown that widespread exploitation can also take place in the licensed prostitution sector have undoubtedly been a factor in this. the rapporteur has repeatedly pointed out that a comprehensive policy is also required in this area one in which tackling the illegal sector is as important as firm supervision of the licensed sector. in the draft act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry the dutch government has proposed a series of measures in response to some of the developments and new insights that have emerged since the lifting of the ban on brothels. accordingly the netherlands has shown that it is willing to look critically at the effects of policies and to revise them if necessary. to whom does the national rapporteur address her recommendations she reports to the government and can make recommendations to all government agencies and non governmental organizations in the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the netherlands ten years on volved in formulating and implementing policy on human trafficking. recommendations have been directed at the central government as a whole the legislature the judiciary local authorities the insti tutions that provide shelter and help for victims as well as to executive agencies such as the police the public prosecution service the labour inspectorate the social intelligence and investigation service and the tax authorities. more specifically the recommendations have been addressed to the organisations with coordinating and executive duties. inherent to the independent position of the rapporteur is the fact that the rapporteur has no coordinating or executive duties. in the netherlands those tasks are performed by public officials or consortia of the relevant organisations. for example comensha coordinates the placement of victims. one of the members of the council of police chiefs has been assigned the human trafficking portfolio as has one of the procurators general. in addition the public prosecution service has a national public prosecutor and eleven regional prosecutors. the police service s centre of expertise for human traffic king and migrant smuggling emm has the task of collecting and analysing strategic and operational information while the police and public prosecution service have formed a number of consultative bo dies lem oom boom to coordinate their activities and share operational information. the ministries of justice foreign affairs the interior and kingdom relations health welfare and sport partly from the perspective of youth and family and social affairs and employment as the ministry responsible for the siod and the labour inspectorate also have coordinating and management tasks. furthermore in response to a recommendation by the rapporteur the task force on human trafficking consisting of leading members of those key organisations together with representatives of local authorities was esta blished with the task of identifying bottlenecks solving problems and promoting innovative initiatives. in light of the results that have been achieved it would be logical to extend the task force s mandate which expires at the beginning of . that would present a good opportunity to formalise the position of comensha which is not a member of the task force but is attending its meetings. the situation in where do efforts to combat human trafficking stand in the netherlands in there is a lot of political and public attention for the phenomenon of human trafficking. but while the police and the public pro secution service have made human trafficking a clear priority in practice there are persistent problems in terms of capacity and giving it the priority it needs. partly through the efforts of the task force innovative investigative methods are being used and pro gress is being made in promoting the chain philosophy. the policy towards victims living illegally in the netherlands has become more balanced but there are still tensions with respect to assumed abuses of the facilities for victims provided under immigration law experienced as a disproportionate burden on the capacity of the police and the public prosecution service in cases with little prospect of successful prosecution and on the other hand the recognition of a person s status as a victim apart from leads for a criminal investigation. the provision of assistance for victims is also still characterised by a shortage of capacity although the situation has improved as regards initial shelter for victims. there is progress in that area with the pilot project to investigate whether category oriented initial shelter should be created and if so what form it should take. providing shelter and care for underage victims is a task of the youth care services but they have not yet formulated an adequate vision of the specific needs of this group. task force on human trafficking b. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring there is attention for prevention in the form of campaigns to raise awareness targeted at the general public at clients of prostitutes and for example also at the staff of diplomatic missions abroad as well as in the form of information for schools and the workplace. preventing individuals from becoming victims is at the heart of the policy to combat human trafficking. it is noteworthy in this context that the number of dutch victims declined in in both absolute and relative terms for the first time since . as far as foreign victims are concerned the ind should consider compiling a safety file on victims it is considering repatriating to their country of origin partly in order to prevent revictimisation. the approach to other forms of exploitation is still evolving. awareness and cooperation in the chain with respect to other forms of exploitation have started to grow particularly in the last few years alt hough these situations of exploitation still seem to be less easily recognised. there is also no vision of the facilities needed for victims of other forms of exploitation. with the growing awareness of exploi tation outside the sex industry it will become increasingly common for large groups of victims often male to be discovered at the same time which will impose special demands on shelter capacity. it is only in the last year that there have been more than incidental convictions for other forms of exploitation. the judgment of the supreme court on october in a case of exploitation in a chinese restaurant provides important guidelines for trying cases of other forms of exploitation. the interpretation of the definition of the offence is expected to be further elaborated in other cases in the coming years. areas requiring attention in the future the role of the internet in human trafficking will demand a lot of attention in the coming period. the importance of information and communication technology ict also in relation to human trafficking has grown enormously in a relatively short space of time. the internet is used to recruit potential victims as a means of coercing victims with compromising photos or films or as a medium to exploit victims. images of sexual acts with victims circulating on the internet constitute a new dimension to victimhood. young potential victims spend a large part of their lives in the internet environment but that is not al ways true of those who have to protect them. there is therefore ground to be made up. not only to learn more about the virtual world of young people but also to make optimal use of the possibilities of ict. one area calling for attention is the development of the care for victims. is further specialisation the correct approach the pilot project on category oriented shelter will provide more certainty about this what is particularly needed is a vision for the care that the youth care services should provide for un derage victims. from the outset the rapporteur has made recommendations concerning the collection and proper registration of data. since the rapporteur does not perform executive tasks herself she depends to a con siderable extent on how other organizations keep records whether for their own operations or for the benefit of the rapporteur. compiling aggregated results from the data from the computerised systems of the relevant agencies without their intervention could be compatible with the role of independent observer and rapporteur. if it were to prove technically feasible to automate this task bnrm would be the most logical choice to perform it. see appendix table b . . for a lengthy discussion of this judgment see . . . the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings in the netherlands ten years on we are still a long way from reaching a situation where there is sufficient control of the dutch prosti tution sector to substantially reduce vulnerability to exploitation in the sector what is needed here are better and more uniform enforcement and supervision and control of the illegal sector. one cause for concern is the possible shift from window prostitution which is in theory relatively easier to control to other forms of sexual services that are more difficult to monitor. the proposed introduction of the act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry and the evaluation of the effects it has are very important in this context. the development of case law on both sexual exploitation and other forms of exploitation will also remain an important topic in the coming period. this will include such aspects as specialisation wit hin the judiciary the development of guidelines for sentencing and analysis of case law. attention will certainly be paid to the decline in the proportion of convictions in human trafficking cases in the last decade. finally there may be a further expansion of the domain covered by the rapporteur when part of the netherlands antilles becomes part of the netherlands on october as a result of constitutional reforms. conclusion the post of national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings has now existed for years in the ne therlands. the approach chosen was to create an institution that while part of the central government occupies an entirely independent position similar to an independent advisory body of the government. the rapporteur is a full time official with her own staff whose core task is to report on the nature and scale of human trafficking and on the effects of policies to combat it. with this structure the netherlands has created a powerful instrument. through the appointment of an independent rapporteur to evaluate policy and make recommendations on it the dutch government has arranged structural feedback. this can be regarded as a powerful model for the office of rapporteur. this robust instrument demonstrates the dutch government s determination to achieve tangible results in tackling human trafficking. the government further underlined its intentions by extending the rap porteur s mandate for at least another four years in . decision of the minister of justice appointing the rapporteur . the appointment decision pro vides for an evaluation after four years to be followed by a new decision on whether or not to extend the appointment. bibliography academic network for legal studies on immigration and asylum in europe. synthesis report astablished for the european commission regarding the implementation bij eu memberstates of directive victims of traf ficking jls b . adviescommissie voor vreemdelingenzaken acvz . . de mens beschermd en de handel bestreden. een advies over een evenwichtig beschermingsregime voor slachtoffers van mensenhandel. the hague acvz. anti slavery international. . trafficking for forced labour. uk country report. londen anti slavery inter national. available via www.antislavery.org includes documents cm docs t trafficking for for ced labour uk country report.pdf. aronowitz a.a. . guidelines for the collection of data on trafficking in human beings including comparable indicators. vienna iom. balkestein j. . rapport van een onderzoek naar den handel in vrouwen. place unknown nationaal comit tot bestrijding van den handel in vrouwen. blekendaal m. . de handel in blanke slavinnen. historisch nieuwsblad nr. . bnrm . jaar nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel een terugblik. the hague office of the nrm. boermans b. . uitgebuit en in de bak slachtoffers van mensenhandel in vreemdelingendetentie. amsterdam blinn humanitas oxfam novib. boot matthijssen m. . artikel en de aanpak van mensenhandel. njcm bulletin jrg. . boutellier h. goderie m. . het slachtoffer en zijn ketens. een studie naar mensenhandel in strafrechtelijk perspectief. utrecht verwey jonker instituut. bundeskriminalamt. . palermo protokoll und die folgen. bek mpfung des menschenhandels zum zweck sexueller ausbeutung materialsammlung zu nationalen und internationalen eher strategisch ausgerichteten aktivit ten. wiesbaden bundeskriminalamt. available via www.bka.de kriminalwissenschaften ebook mh sex ausbeutung ebook mh sex ausbeutung.html. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring brouns m. e.a. . het lange wachten op een veilige toekomst. onderzoek naar veiligheid van vrouwen in asiel zoekersopvang. rijswijk coa. caplan a. dominguez gil b. matesanz r. prior c. . trafficking in organs tissues and cells and traf ficking in human beings for the purpose of the removal of organs. raad van europa verenigde naties claassen s. . dan moeten ze maar hun mond opendoen slachtoffers van mensenhandel in vreemdelingenbe waring. amsterdam blinn humanitas oxfam novib. comensha . jaarverslag . amersfoort comensha. college van procureurs generaal. . aanwijzing mensenhandel. college van procureurs generaal. college van procureurs generaal. . aanwijzing mensenhandel. college van procureurs generaal. coster van voorhout j. . human trafficking for labour exploitation. a framework for implementation of the crime of human trafficking for labour exploitation as defined in the european council framework decision in eu countries. utrecht science shop of law economics and governance utrecht university. daalder a.l. . prostitutie in nederland na opheffing van het bordeelverbod. the hague boom juridische uitgevers. defence for children ecpat en unicef . jaarbericht kinderrechten . leiden defence for children ecpat dijk d. hoekstra l. nieuwenhout y. . als de nood aan de man is. een verkennende studie naar de opvang van en hulpverlening aanmannelijke slachtoffers van dreiging van geweld in afhankelijkheidsrelaties. rotterdam. gaatw. . collateral damage the impact of anti trafficking measures on human rights around the world . avai lable via www.gaatw.org collateral damage final singlefile collateraldamagefinal.pdf gallagher a.t. . human trafficking international law and international responsibility diss. universiteit van utrecht. no publisher. gestel b. van verhoeven m. . de praktijk van de programmatische aanpak mensenhandel. the hague wodc. hendriks j. corsel m. . handreiking. ketenregie en bestuurlijk toezicht in de vergunde prostitutiesector. task force mensenhandel. hout m.m.j. van laan f.j. van der. . schone schijn. de signalering van mensenhandel in de vergunde prostitutiesector. driebergen klpd. human trafficking turning our attention to labour exploitation. . utrecht science shop of law economics and governance utrecht university. to be found at www.bnrm.nl. ilo. . european delphi survey on indicators of trafficking in human beings jointly implemented by the european commission and the ilo. wenen ilo bibliography ilo the european commission. . operational indicators of trafficking in human beings results from a delphi survey. wenen ilo. korterink h.j. . echte mannen eten w l kaas. amsterdam nieuw amsterdam. kutnick b. belser p. dainalova trainor g. . methodologies for global and national estimation of human trafficking victims current and future approaches. ilo geneve. kromhout m.h.c. liefaard t. galloway a.m. beenakkers e.m.th. kamstra b. aidala r. . tussen beheersing en begeleiding. een evaluatie van de pilot beschermde opvang risico amv s . den haag wodc cahier . leun j. van der vervoorn l. . slavernij achtige uitbuiting in nederland. een inventariserende literatuurstu die in het kader van de uitbreiding van de strafbaarstelling van mensenhandel. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. mosterd m. . echte mannen eten geen kaas. amsterdam uitgeverij van gennep b.v. munckhof r. van den huijsmans e.c. stassen kanters m.m. bijleveld m. linden m. van der koks ma h.w. et. al. . kenniscentra voor de rechtspraak. trema nr. . nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel. . trafficking in human beings first report of the dutch national rap porteur. the hague bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel. . trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel. . trafficking in human beings third report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel. . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel. . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel. . trafficking in human beings sixth report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel. . trafficking in human beings seventh report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bnrm. openbaar ministerie. . jaarbericht . available via www.jaarberichtom.nl. rood utrecht. . in gesprek met slachtoffers van loverboys een onderzoek naar ervaringen met politie en justitie van het proces van aangifte tot de veroordeling. available via www.rood.utrecht.sp.nl. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring secherling p.h.t. nelen j.m. . financieel rechercheren in nederland een literatuurverkenning onderzoek snotities nr. . den haag wodc. silvis j. . vooropgestelde arresten . ontwikkelingen in de strafrechtelijke jurisprudentie . den haag sdu. steenhuis d.w. . alles is niets. rapportage naar aanleiding van de niet ontvankelijkheid in de mensenhandelzaak sierra. om. available via www.om.nl publish pages rapport sierra.pdf. surtees r. . handbook on anti trafficking data collection in south eastern europe developing regional criteria. wenen icmpd. surtees r. . anti trafficking data collection and information management in the european union a handbook the situation in the czech republic poland portugal and the slovak republic. wenen icmpd task force aanpak mensenhandel a. plan van aanpak task force aanpak mensenhandel. available via www.om.nl. task force aanpak mensenhandel b. voortgangsrapportage. stand van zaken september . not published . united states department of state. . trafficking in persons report . available via www.state.gov g tip rls tiprpt . vermeulen g. ed. . . betaalseksrecht naar regulering of legalisering van niet problematische prostitutie antwerpen apeldoorn maklu. vermeulen g. paterson n. . the montrasec demo a bench mark for member state and eu automated data collection and reporting on trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of children. gent ircp. zanetti v. . de digitale loverboy. proces . appendix a article f of the dutch criminal code non official translation i article f of the dutch criminal code valid until july . any person who a by force violence or other act by the threat of violence or other act by extortion fraud deception or the misuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs by the misuse of a vulnerable position or by giving or receiving remuneration or benefits in order to obtain the consent of a person who has control over this other person recruits transports moves accommodates or shelters another person with the intention of exploiting this other person or removing his or her organs b recruits transports moves accommodates or shelters a person with the intention of exploiting that other person or removing his or her organs when that person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years c recruits takes with him or abducts a person with the intention of inducing that person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration in another country d forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to make himself herself avai lable for performing work or services or making his her organs available or takes any action in the circumstances referred to under a which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know will result in that other person making himself herself available for performing labour or services or making his her organs available e induces another person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration or to make his her organs available for remuneration or takes any action towards another person which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that this will result in that other person making himself herself available for performing these acts or making his her organs available for remuneration when that other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years f willfully profits from the exploitation of another person g willfully profits from the removal of organs from another person while he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that the organs of that person have been removed under the circumstances referred to under a h willfully profits from the sexual acts of another person with or for a third party for remuneration or the removal of that person s organs for remuneration when this other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years i forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to provide him with the proceeds of that person s sexual acts with or for a third party or of the removal of that person s organs shall trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring be guilty of trafficking in human beings and as such liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties . exploitation comprises at least the exploitation of another person in prostitution other forms of sexual exploitation forced or compulsory labour or services slavery slavery like practices or servitude. . the following offences shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding eight years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties a offences as described in the first paragraph if they are committed by two or more persons acting in concert b offences as described in the first paragraph if such offences are committed in respect of a person who is under the age of sixteen. . the offences as described in the first paragraph committed by two or more persons acting in con cert under the circumstance referred to in paragraph under b shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. . if one of the offences described in the first paragraph results in serious physical injury or threatens the life of another person it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. . if one of the offences referred to in the first paragraph results in death it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding fifteen years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. . article is applicable mutatis mutandis. a fifth category fine is a fine of maximum . . i i article f of the dutch criminal code valid from july . any person who a by force violence or other act by the threat of violence or other act by extortion fraud deception or the misuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs by the misuse of a vulnerable position or by giving or receiving remuneration or benefits in order to obtain the consent of a person who has control over this other person recruits transports moves accommodates or shelters another person with the intention of exploiting this other person or removing his or her organs b recruits transports moves accommodates or shelters a person with the intention of exploiting that other person or removing his or her organs when that person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years c recruits takes with him or abducts a person with the intention of inducing that person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration in another country d forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to make himself herself avai lable for performing work or services or making his her organs available or takes any action in the circumstances referred to under a which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know will result in that other person making himself herself available for performing labour or services or making his her organs available e induces another person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration or to make his her organs available for remuneration or takes any action towards another person which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that this will result article f of the dutch criminal code non official translation in that other person making himself herself available for performing these acts or making his her organs available for remuneration when that other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years f wilfully profits from the exploitation of another person g wilfully profits from the removal of organs from another person while he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that the organs of that person have been removed under the circumstances referred to under a h wilfully profits from the sexual acts of another person with or for a third party for remuneration or the removal of that person s organs for remuneration when this other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years i forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to provide him with the proceeds of that person s sexual acts with or for a third party or of the remo val of that person s organs shall be guilty of trafficking in human beings and as such liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding eight years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties . exploitation comprises at least the exploitation of another person in prostitution other forms of sexual exploitation forced or compulsory labour or services slavery slavery like practices or servitude. . the following offences shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties a offences as described in the first paragraph if they are committed by two or more persons acting in concert b offences as described in the first paragraph if such offences are committed in respect of a person who is under the age of sixteen. . if one of the offences described in the first paragraph results in serious physical injury or threatens the life of another person it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding fifteen years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. . if one of the offences referred to in the first paragraph results in death it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding eighteen years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. . article is applicable mutatis mutandis. a fifth category fine is a fine of maximum . a explanatory notes to figures tables and statistics notes to the tables this report contains a great many tables particularly in appendix additional tables . the following remarks are relevant for the interpretation of the tables. the totals in the tables do not always come to precisely because figures are rounded off. however to make the tables easier to read the totals are always given as . if a column in a table contains numbers the letter n appears at the top of the column to denote the word number . if a column in a table contains a ranking the letter r appears at the top of the column to denote the word rank . in the tables a dash is used to represent the number zero and to indicate that the associated percen tage is . if the number is higher than zero but the percentage is after rounding off is used instead of a dash. notes to the figures this report contains a great many figures that are based on the additional tables in appendix . the fol lowing remarks are relevant for the interpretation of these figures. in figures that show a trend in absolute terms numbers a line graph is used. if there is more than one line in the figure they represent trends that can be compared unless they are dotted lines in which case the trends are not comparable. in figures that show a trend in relative terms percentages bar charts are used. in figures that provide an overview of one particular period pie charts are used. notes to the statistics standard deviation sd averages are sometimes given in this report for example the average age of suspects and offenders. the number n see above and the standard deviation sd are sometimes also given. the standard devia tion expresses the range in the numbers over which the average is calculated. the higher the standard deviation the greater the range. index figure some tables include an index figure. the index figure shows by how many the number of suspects for example in a particular year has changed in relation to a reference year. the reference year is shown at the top of the table. the figure for that year is . . an index figure higher than . indicates an increase and an index figure lower than . indicates a decline in relation to the reference year. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring significance when differences shown have proved significant meaningful the probability level p value is given in a footnote. a p value of . means that the chance that a difference shown is based on coincidence is . a difference is significant when the chance that the difference is not based on coincidence is equal to or greater than p . . when the chance is equal to or greater than p . it is said to be very significant. a additional tables tables b . to b . supplement . . victims in the comensha register tables b . to b . supplement . . victims and the b regulation tables b . to b . supplement . . victims and compensation tables b . to b . supplement . . suspects and offenders prosecution tables b . to b . supplement . . suspects and offenders trial in first instance tables b . to b . supplement . . suspects and offenders trial on appeal and tables b . to b . supplement . . suspects and offenders characteristics . supplement to . . victims in the comensha register tables b . to b . provide a complete overview of the available data on victims reported to comensha over the last decade. see . . for an explanation of the research method and appendix for explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics. table b . number of victims reported to comensha number of victims n index figure . percentage growth compared with the preceding year . . . . . . . . . . total n. a. n. a. source stv comensha annual reports and databases trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . gender of victims reported to comensha female male unknown n n n almost all almost none almost all almost none almost all almost none source stv comensha annual reports and databases since comensha has registered the gender of the victims. in the period there were only a few male victims information received verbally and in writing from comensha . additional tables table b . age of victims reported to comensha and over unknown n n n n n n n total since source stv comensha annual reports and databases since comensha has registered the age of the victims. the age groups in the period are slightly different and over unknown. the precise age of these reported victims is not known but five victims were probably adults information received verbally and in writing from comensha . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . nationality of victims reported to comensha nationality total top n n n n n n n n n n n r afghan albanian algerian angolan antigua and barbudan armenian azerbaijani belarussian belgian bengali beninois bolivian bosnian brazilian british bulgarian burkinan burundian cameroonian canadian cape verdean chilean chinese colombian comoran congolese croat cuban czech danish dominican additional tables table b . nationality of victims reported to comensha nationality total top n n n n n n n n n n n r afghan albanian algerian angolan antigua and barbudan armenian azerbaijani belarussian belgian bengali beninois bolivian bosnian brazilian british bulgarian burkinan burundian cameroonian canadian cape verdean chilean chinese colombian comoran congolese croat cuban czech danish dominican trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring nationality total top n n n n n n n n n n n r dutch ecuadorian egyptian eritrean estonian ethiopian finnish french gambian georgian german ghanaian greek guinea bissauan guinean guyanese hungarian indian indonesian iranian iraqi irish italian ivorian jamaican kazach kenyan kirghiz kuwaiti latvian lebanese liberian lithuanian continued table b . additional tables nationality total top n n n n n n n n n n n r dutch ecuadorian egyptian eritrean estonian ethiopian finnish french gambian georgian german ghanaian greek guinea bissauan guinean guyanese hungarian indian indonesian iranian iraqi irish italian ivorian jamaican kazach kenyan kirghiz kuwaiti latvian lebanese liberian lithuanian trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring nationality total top n n n n n n n n n n n r luxembourgeois macedonian malawi malaysian mauritanian mexican moldavian mongolian moroccan namibian nepalese nicaraguan nigerian nigerien north korean norwegian pakistani philippine polish portuguese romanian russian soviet russian rwandan senegalese serbian sierra leonean slovak somali south african spanish sri lankan continued table b . additional tables nationality total top n n n n n n n n n n n r luxembourgeois macedonian malawi malaysian mauritanian mexican moldavian mongolian moroccan namibian nepalese nicaraguan nigerian nigerien north korean norwegian pakistani philippine polish portuguese romanian russian soviet russian rwandan senegalese serbian sierra leonean slovak somali south african spanish sri lankan trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring nationality total top n n n n n n n n n n n r sudanese surinamese swedish syrian tadzjik taiwanese tanzanean thai togolese trinidad and tobagoan tunisian turkish ugandan ukrainian uzbek venezuelan vietnamese yugoslavian zambian zimbabwean unknown total source stv comensha annual reports and databases dark blue shading this nationality was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this nationality was in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more of the victims reported to comensha in at least one of the years had this nationality. is not in the top overall but ten or more of the victims reported to comensha in at least one of the years had this nationality. continued table b . additional tables nationality total top n n n n n n n n n n n r sudanese surinamese swedish syrian tadzjik taiwanese tanzanean thai togolese trinidad and tobagoan tunisian turkish ugandan ukrainian uzbek venezuelan vietnamese yugoslavian zambian zimbabwean unknown total source stv comensha annual reports and databases dark blue shading this nationality was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this nationality was in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more of the victims reported to comensha in at least one of the years had this nationality. is not in the top overall but ten or more of the victims reported to comensha in at least one of the years had this nationality. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . nationality of underage victims reported to comensha nationality of underage victims total top n n n n n r afghan angolan armenian azerbaijani beninois brazilian bulgarian cameroonian chinese colombian congolese dutch egyptian gambian german ghanaian guinea bissauan guinean hungarian indian indonesian iranian iraqi italian ivorian from a relationship can be established between age and nationality. additional tables nationality of underage victims total top n n n n n r jamaican lithuanian mongolian moroccan nigerian philippine polish romanian russian serbian sierra leonean slovak somali sudanese surinamese taiwanese thai turkish ugandan ukrainian uzbek zimbabwean unknown total source stv comensha databases dark blue shading this nationality was in the top five in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this nationality was in the top five overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top five overall but five or more of the underage victims reported to comensha in at least one of the years had this nationality. is not in the top five overall but ten or more of the underage victims reported to comensha in at least one of the years had this nationality. continued table b . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . nationality of male victims reported to comensha nationality of male victims total top n n n n n r afghan angolan armenian azerbaijani bengali beninois brazilian bulgarian cameroonian canadian chilean chinese congolese dutch egyptian georgian german ghanaian guinean hungarian indian from a relationship can be established between gender and nationality. additional tables nationality of male victims total top n n n n n r indonesian iraqi ivorean jamaican liberian mauritanian moroccan nepalese nigerian nigerien pakistani polish portuguese romanian russian rwandan sierra leonean somali sri lankan sudanese surinamese tanzanian togolese continued table b . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring nationality of male victims total top n n n n n r turkish ugandan ukrainian vietnamese yugoslavian zimbabwean unknown total source stv comensha databases dark blue shading this nationality was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this nationality was in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more of the male victims reported to comensha in at least one of the years had this nationality. is not in the top overall but ten or more of the male victims reported to comensha in at least one of the years had this nationality. continued table b . additional tables table b . percentage of underage victims among dutch nigerian and other non dutch victims reported to comensha total n n n n n dutch victims of whom underage nigerian victims of whom underage other non dutch victims of whom underage victims of unknown nationality of whom underage total of whom underage source stv comensha databases from a relationship can be established between age and nationality. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . sectors in which victims were exploited sex industry n. a. exploitation sector total f m unknown total f m unknown total f m unknown total n n n n n n n n n n n n n exploitation in the sex industry exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry agriculture and horticulture au pair cleaning construction domestic work drug dealing food industry hospitality textile industry total exploitation other forced organ donation n. a. unknown total source stv comensha annual reports and databases since bnrm has had access to information about the sectors in which the reported victims were exploited. note some victims were exploited in more than one sector but in order to bring the totals to these victims are only recorded under one sector. the other sectors in which they were exploited are shown between brackets under those sectors. such as brothel club escort internet one female victim in massage parlour private home window prostitution street prostitution. if the victim has not yet worked. additional tables table b . sectors in which victims were exploited sex industry n. a. exploitation sector total f m unknown total f m unknown total f m unknown total n n n n n n n n n n n n n exploitation in the sex industry exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry agriculture and horticulture au pair cleaning construction domestic work drug dealing food industry hospitality textile industry total exploitation other forced organ donation n. a. unknown total source stv comensha annual reports and databases since bnrm has had access to information about the sectors in which the reported victims were exploited. note some victims were exploited in more than one sector but in order to bring the totals to these victims are only recorded under one sector. the other sectors in which they were exploited are shown between brackets under those sectors. such as brothel club escort internet one female victim in massage parlour private home window prostitution street prostitution. if the victim has not yet worked. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . notifiers field work individuals social services human trafficking notifiers total top n n n n n n n n n n r health care field work ind individuals legal social services networks for victims of human trafficking police refugee asylum worker royal netherlands marechaussee shelters siod victim personally victim support organisation youth care services other organisations unknown anonymous total source stv comensha annual reports and databases comensha has registered notifiers since . from the total number of notifications in a year no longer corresponds with the total number of reported victims in that year compared with compared with compared with . the reason for this is that some victims are reported to comensha by different individuals or agencies and since comensha has registered all of the various notifiers. institutions municipal health services doctors hospital staff who provide medical care and information to prostitutes in the workplace or at the surgery. they could be family friends or a partner of the victim. notifications sometimes come from a client stv annual report . the category social services was introduced without specification in the stv annual report for . pre viously the category legal services had been used legal aid office pro bono lawyers victim support offices and lawyers . both categories were used in the stv annual report for and in the comensha annual report for . in and there were separate categories for social services and lawyers . for the purposes of comparability the categories social services legal services and lawyers are merged in the table. the networks for victims of human trafficking were established by comensha to provide integrated as sistance for victims. the networks are supervised by a care coordinator or by comensha if there is no coordinator. before the few notifications by the networks were included in the category shelters . additional tables police asylum worker marechaussee shelters siod support organisation care services other organisations this category covers every police service that could be confronted with human trafficking. these are professional groups that work in reporting centres reception centres and asylum seeker centres such as refugeeworkers vluchtelingenwerk but also counsellors and medical staff the coa and the deportation holding centre grenshospitium . in the royal netherlands marechaussee kmar reported victims for the first time. those noti fications were the result of the activities of the sluis team that intercepts possible victims of human trafficking at schiphol. including facilities for public and women s shelters and religious private or local initiatives. in victims were reported for the first time by the social intelligence and investigation service siod following working agreements made by comensha with the siod at the beginning of comensha annual report . general social work including addiction treatment and prostitution social work. child protection council youth care agency offices and the guardianship service of stichting nidos. including the international organisation for migration iom from which eight notifications were received in . table b . notifiers field work individuals social services human trafficking notifiers total top n n n n n n n n n n r health care field work ind individuals legal social services networks for victims of human trafficking police refugee asylum worker royal netherlands marechaussee shelters siod victim personally victim support organisation youth care services other organisations unknown anonymous total source stv comensha annual reports and databases comensha has registered notifiers since . from the total number of notifications in a year no longer corresponds with the total number of reported victims in that year compared with compared with compared with . the reason for this is that some victims are reported to comensha by different individuals or agencies and since comensha has registered all of the various notifiers. institutions municipal health services doctors hospital staff who provide medical care and information to prostitutes in the workplace or at the surgery. they could be family friends or a partner of the victim. notifications sometimes come from a client stv annual report . the category social services was introduced without specification in the stv annual report for . pre viously the category legal services had been used legal aid office pro bono lawyers victim support offices and lawyers . both categories were used in the stv annual report for and in the comensha annual report for . in and there were separate categories for social services and lawyers . for the purposes of comparability the categories social services legal services and lawyers are merged in the table. the networks for victims of human trafficking were established by comensha to provide integrated as sistance for victims. the networks are supervised by a care coordinator or by comensha if there is no coordinator. before the few notifications by the networks were included in the category shelters . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . purpose of notification by notifier notifiers registration registration information advice registration shelter total n n n n individual legal social services networks for victims of human trafficking police refugee asylum worker royal netherlands marechaussee shelter siod victim personally victim support organisation youth care institution other organisations total source comensha databases these notifications concern different reported victims one victim was reported both by police and by legal social services two victims were reported both by police and by networks for victims of human trafficking and one victim was reported both by police and by shelter . these notifications concern different reported victims two victims were reported both by police and by legal social services five victims were reported both by police and by networks of victims of human trafficking two victims were reported both by police and by shelter two victims were reported both by police and by other organisations one victim was reported both by police and by individual and one victims was reported both by royal netherlands marechaussee and by networks for victims of human trafficking . these notifications concern different reported victims one victim was reported both by police and by legal social services four victims were reported both by police and by networks for victims of human trafficking and one victim was reported by both police by networks for victims of human trafficking and by legal social services . additional tables supplement to . . victims and the b regulation tables b . to b . provide a complete overview of the available data on the applications made to the ind for b residence permits and the b permits granted by the ind in the last decade. see . . for a description of the research method and appendix for explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics. table b . number of b applications number of b applications n index figure . percentage growth compared with the preceding year . . . . . . . . total n. a. n. a. source ind databases in nrm the number was incorrectly reported as . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . number of b awards number of b awards n index figure . percentage growth compared with the preceding year . . . . . . . . total n. a. n.a. source ind databases table b . gender of victims granted b status female female male source ind databases for the period it was not been established with certainty whether all victims were women. additional tables table b . age of victims granted b status and over total n n n n n n n total source ind databases the age of one victim is not known. the age of one victim who was granted a b residence permit in is not known. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . nationality of victims granted b status nationality total top n n n n n n n n n r albanian angolan armenian azerbaijani belarussian belgian bengali beninean bolivian bosnian brazilian british bulgarian burundian cameroonian cape verdean central african chinese congolese zairean croatian czech dominican estonian ethiopian finnish french gambian georgian german ghanaian additional tables table b . nationality of victims granted b status nationality total top n n n n n n n n n r albanian angolan armenian azerbaijani belarussian belgian bengali beninean bolivian bosnian brazilian british bulgarian burundian cameroonian cape verdean central african chinese congolese zairean croatian czech dominican estonian ethiopian finnish french gambian georgian german ghanaian trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring nationality total top n n n n n n n n n r guinean hungarian indian indonesian iranian iraqi italian ivorian jamaican kenyan kirgizian latvian lebanese liberian lithuanian malaysian mauritanian moldavian mongolian moroccan namibian nepalese nigerian nigerien norwegian noth korean pakistani philippine polish continued table b . additional tables nationality total top n n n n n n n n n r guinean hungarian indian indonesian iranian iraqi italian ivorian jamaican kenyan kirgizian latvian lebanese liberian lithuanian malaysian mauritanian moldavian mongolian moroccan namibian nepalese nigerian nigerien norwegian noth korean pakistani philippine polish trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring nationality total top n n n n n n n n n r romanian russian soviet russian rwandan senegalese sierra leonean slovak somali south african sudanese surinamese taiwanese tanzanian thai togolese tunisian turkish ugandan ukrainian uzbeki vietnamese yugoslavian zimbabwean unknown stateless total source ind databases dark blue shading this nationality was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this nationality was in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more victims who were granted b status had this nationality in at least one of the years . is not in the top overall but ten or more victims who were granted b status had this nationality in at least one of the years . continued table b . additional tables nationality total top n n n n n n n n n r romanian russian soviet russian rwandan senegalese sierra leonean slovak somali south african sudanese surinamese taiwanese tanzanian thai togolese tunisian turkish ugandan ukrainian uzbeki vietnamese yugoslavian zimbabwean unknown stateless total source ind databases dark blue shading this nationality was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this nationality was in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more victims who were granted b status had this nationality in at least one of the years . is not in the top overall but ten or more victims who were granted b status had this nationality in at least one of the years . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . region of origin of victims granted b status eu eu new member states non eu eastern europe non eu western europe region of origin total n n n n n n n n n eu eu new member states non eu eastern europe non eu western europe africa latin america the carribean asia unknown stateless total source ind databases eu member states since belgium france italy luxembourg the netherlands germany den mark ireland greece united kingdom portugal spain finland austria and sweden. eu member states since cyprus estonia hungary latvia lithuania malta poland slovenia slovakia czech republic and since bulgaria and romania. non eu countries in eastern europe russia moldavia ukraine belarus albania bosnia herzegovina serbia macedonia croatia montenegro kazakhstan turkey kirgizia azerbaijan. non eu countries in western europe switzerland norway iceland isle of man the faeroe islands andorra gibraltar vatican city san marino liechtenstein monaco. additional tables table b . region of origin of victims granted b status eu eu new member states non eu eastern europe non eu western europe region of origin total n n n n n n n n n eu eu new member states non eu eastern europe non eu western europe africa latin america the carribean asia unknown stateless total source ind databases eu member states since belgium france italy luxembourg the netherlands germany den mark ireland greece united kingdom portugal spain finland austria and sweden. eu member states since cyprus estonia hungary latvia lithuania malta poland slovenia slovakia czech republic and since bulgaria and romania. non eu countries in eastern europe russia moldavia ukraine belarus albania bosnia herzegovina serbia macedonia croatia montenegro kazakhstan turkey kirgizia azerbaijan. non eu countries in western europe switzerland norway iceland isle of man the faeroe islands andorra gibraltar vatican city san marino liechtenstein monaco. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b. . police region from which successful b applications were made police region total top n n n n n n n n n r amsterdam amstelland brabant noord brabant zuid oost drenthe flevoland friesland gelderland midden gelderland zuid gooi en vechtstreek groningen haaglanden hollands midden ijsselland kennemerland limburg noord limburg zuid midden en west brabant noord en oost gelderland noord holland noord rotterdam rijnmond twente utrecht zaanstreek waterland zeeland zuid holland zuid unknown total source ind databases additional tables table b. . police region from which successful b applications were made police region total top n n n n n n n n n r amsterdam amstelland brabant noord brabant zuid oost drenthe flevoland friesland gelderland midden gelderland zuid gooi en vechtstreek groningen haaglanden hollands midden ijsselland kennemerland limburg noord limburg zuid midden en west brabant noord en oost gelderland noord holland noord rotterdam rijnmond twente utrecht zaanstreek waterland zeeland zuid holland zuid unknown total source ind databases trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring supplement to . . victims and compensation tables b . to b . provide a complete overview of the available data from the cjib concerning the compensation orders made in cases that led to convictions for at least human trafficking in the period . see . . for an explanation of the research method and appendix for the explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics. table b . number of compensation orders made number of compensation orders n index figure . percentage growth compared with the preceding year number of victims involved n index figure . percentage growth compared with the preceding year . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . total n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. source cjib reference date may x victim and x victims. x victim x victims and x victims. x victim x victims. x victim. x victim x victims x victims and x victims. x victim x victims x victims and x victims. x victim and x victims. x victim x victims and x victims. x victim x victims and x victims. x victim x victims x victims and x victims. x victim x victims x victims and x victims. additional tables table b . compensation orders by amount of claim amount claimed in total n n n n n n n n n n n more than total source cjib reference date may table b . compensation orders by disposition disposition total n n n n n n n n n n n payment in full alternative custodial sentence other n.a. open total source cjib reference date may table b . compensation orders by amount paid amount paid in total n n n n n n n n n n n more than total source cjib reference date may trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring supplement to . . suspects and offenders prosecution tables b . to b . provide a complete overview of the available data from the pps database on the human trafficking cases registered by the pps and the human trafficking cases dealt with by the pps in the period and occasionally including . see . for the explanation of the research me thod and appendix for the explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics. table b . number of cases suspects registered by the pps number of cases suspects registered by pps index figure . percentage growth compared with preceding year . . . . . . . . . . total n.v.t n.v.t source pps database reference date january according to the public prosecution service s annual report . additional tables table b . registered cases that involved underage victims case registered by pps cases that involved underage victims n n total source pps database reference date january trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . cases registered by each district office total top n n n n n n n n n n r alkmaar almelo amsterdam arnhem assen breda den bosch dordrecht groningen haarlem leeuwarden maastricht middelburg roermond rotterdam the hague utrecht zutphen zwolle total n.a. source pps database reference date january dark blue shading this district office was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number . additional tables table b . cases registered by each district office total top n n n n n n n n n n r alkmaar almelo amsterdam arnhem assen breda den bosch dordrecht groningen haarlem leeuwarden maastricht middelburg roermond rotterdam the hague utrecht zutphen zwolle total n.a. source pps database reference date january dark blue shading this district office was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . nature of the registered cases total n n n n n n n n n n non aggravated human trafficking ter a section a f section total aggravated human trafficking ter a section ter a section a f section a f section a f section a f section total total source pps database reference date january table b . registered cases by most serious offence total n n n n n n n n n n aggravated human trafficking non aggravated human trafficking sexual violence other violence other offfences total source pps database reference date january additional tables table b . nature of the registered cases total n n n n n n n n n n non aggravated human trafficking ter a section a f section total aggravated human trafficking ter a section ter a section a f section a f section a f section a f section total total source pps database reference date january table b . registered cases by most serious offence total n n n n n n n n n n aggravated human trafficking non aggravated human trafficking sexual violence other violence other offfences total source pps database reference date january trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . registered cases and preventive custody preventive custody no preventive custody total n n n total source pps database reference date january additional tables table b . number of cases dealt with by pps number of cases dealt with by pps n index figure . percentage growth compared with preceding year . . . . . . . . . . total n.a. n.a. source pps database reference date january according to the public prosecution service s annual report . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . cases dealt with by disposition total n n n n n n n n n n summons for human trafficking summons for other offences unconditional decision not to prosecute joinder conditional decision not to prosecute transfer within the pps transfer to another institution out of court settlement total source pps database reference date january additional tables supplement to . . suspects and offenders trial in first instance tables b . to b . provide a complete overview of the available data from the pps database on human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance in the period . see . for an explanation of the research method and appendix for explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics table b . number of cases dealt with in first instance number of cases dealt with in first instance n index figure . percentage growth compared with preceding year . . . . . . . . . total n.a. n.a. source pps database reference date january table b . cases dealt with by disposition total n n n n n n n n n n summons for human trafficking summons for other offences unconditional decision not to prosecute joinder conditional decision not to prosecute transfer within the pps transfer to another institution out of court settlement total source pps database reference date january trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . cases dealt with in first instance by disposition total n n n n n n n n n n conviction also for human trafficking only for other offences total complete acquittal dismissal of the charges prosecution declared inadmissible joined at trial other decisions total source pps database reference date january additional tables table b . cases dealt with in first instance by disposition total n n n n n n n n n n conviction also for human trafficking only for other offences total complete acquittal dismissal of the charges prosecution declared inadmissible joined at trial other decisions total source pps database reference date january trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . cases dealt with in first instance by most serious registered offence in the indictment total n n n n n n n n n n non aggravated human trafficking acquittal conviction dismissal of the charges joined at trial total aggravated human trafficking acquittal conviction prosecution declared inadmissible joined at trial other decisions total sexual violence acquittal conviction prosecution declared inadmissible joined at trial total other violence acquittal conviction joined at trial total other acquittal conviction joined at trial total total acquittal conviction prosecution declared inadmissible dismissal of the charges joined at trial other decisions total source pps database reference date january the following has to be noted in interpreting this table a conviction in a case in which for example human trafficking is the most serious registered offence charged does not mean that there was also a conviction for human trafficking in that case. after all it is possible that there was a conviction for an offence other than human trafficking in the case while the human trafficking offence was declared unproven. the opposite can also apply in a case where an offence other than human trafficking is the most serious registered offence in the indictment for example sexual violence there may be a conviction for a human trafficking offence. additional tables table b . cases dealt with in first instance by most serious registered offence in the indictment total n n n n n n n n n n non aggravated human trafficking acquittal conviction dismissal of the charges joined at trial total aggravated human trafficking acquittal conviction prosecution declared inadmissible joined at trial other decisions total sexual violence acquittal conviction prosecution declared inadmissible joined at trial total other violence acquittal conviction joined at trial total other acquittal conviction joined at trial total total acquittal conviction prosecution declared inadmissible dismissal of the charges joined at trial other decisions total source pps database reference date january the following has to be noted in interpreting this table a conviction in a case in which for example human trafficking is the most serious registered offence charged does not mean that there was also a conviction for human trafficking in that case. after all it is possible that there was a conviction for an offence other than human trafficking in the case while the human trafficking offence was declared unproven. the opposite can also apply in a case where an offence other than human trafficking is the most serious registered offence in the indictment for example sexual violence there may be a conviction for a human trafficking offence. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . nature of the convictions in first instance total n n n n n n n n n n conviction for non aggravated human trafficking conviction for aggravated human trafficking total source pps database reference date january table b . convictions in first instance by sentence imposed total n n n n n n n n n n non aggravated human trafficking no principal punishment only a conditional sentence custodial sentence community service fine total aggravated human trafficking no principal punishment only a conditional sentence custodial sentence community service fine total total no principal punishment only a conditional sentence custodial sentence community service fine total source pps database reference date january additional tables table b . nature of the convictions in first instance total n n n n n n n n n n conviction for non aggravated human trafficking conviction for aggravated human trafficking total source pps database reference date january table b . convictions in first instance by sentence imposed total n n n n n n n n n n non aggravated human trafficking no principal punishment only a conditional sentence custodial sentence community service fine total aggravated human trafficking no principal punishment only a conditional sentence custodial sentence community service fine total total no principal punishment only a conditional sentence custodial sentence community service fine total source pps database reference date january trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . custodial sentences imposed in first instance by length of sentence total n n n n n n n n n n non aggravated human trafficking up to year to years more than years total aggravated human trafficking up to year to years more than years total total up to year to years more than years total source pps database reference date january table b . cases dealt with in first instance that were appealed appeal total n n n n n n n n n n none only by public prosecutor only by suspect by both total source pps database reference date january additional tables table b . custodial sentences imposed in first instance by length of sentence total n n n n n n n n n n non aggravated human trafficking up to year to years more than years total aggravated human trafficking up to year to years more than years total total up to year to years more than years total source pps database reference date january table b . cases dealt with in first instance that were appealed appeal total n n n n n n n n n n none only by public prosecutor only by suspect by both total source pps database reference date january trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring supplement to . . suspects and offenders trial on appeal tables b . to b . provide a complete overview of the available data from the objd on human traffic king cases dealt with on appeal in the period . see . for the research method and appendix for explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics. table b . number of cases dealt with on appeal number of cases dealt with on appeal index figure . percentage growth compared with preceding year n . . . . . . . . . total n.a. n.a. source objd reference date january table b . cases dealt with on appeal by disposition and disposition to to total n n n conviction acquittal prosecution declared inadmissible total source objd reference date january for two cases in the period there are no judgments so there is no additional information. consequently the totals in the two following tables come to rather than . additional tables table b . cases dealt with on appeal by most serious registered offence in the indictment and most serious offence to to total n n n non aggravated human trafficking conviction acquittal prosecution declared inadmissible total aggravated human trafficking conviction acquittal prosecution declared inadmissible total sexual violence conviction acquittal prosecution declared inadmissible total other violence conviction total other offences conviction acquittal total total conviction acquittal prosecution declared inadmisisble total source objd reference date january the following has to be noted in interpreting this table a conviction in a case in which for example human trafficking is the most serious registered offence charged does not mean that there was also a conviction for human trafficking in that case. after all it is possible that there was a conviction for an offence other than human trafficking in the case while the human trafficking offence was declared unproven. the opposite can also apply in a case where an offence other than human trafficking is the most serious registered offence in the indictment for example sexual violence there may be a conviction for a human trafficking offence. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . convictions on appeal by sentence imposed and type of sentence to to total n n n custodial sentence community service only a conditional sentence fine total source objd reference date january table b . custodial sentences imposed on appeal by length of sentence and length of custodial sentence to to total n n n up to year to years more than years total source objd reference date january additional tables supplement to . . suspects and offenders characteristics tables b . to b . provide a complete overview of the available data from the pps database concerning the suspects registered by the pps and the offenders convicted in first instance in the period . see . for an explanation of the research method and appendix for explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics table b . number of offenders convicted in first instance number of offenders convicted in first instance n index figure . percentage growth compared with the preceding year . . . . . . . . . total n.a. n.a. source pps database reference date january trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . gender of suspects female male n.a. legal entity unknown total n n n n n total source pps database reference date january table b . gender of convicted offenders female male unknown total n n n n total source pps database reference date january additional tables table b . age of suspects younger than and over n.a. legal entity unknown total n n n n n n n n n total source pps database reference date january table b . age of convicted offenders younger than and over unknown total n n n n n n n n total source pps database reference date january trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . average age of suspects average age number n standard deviation total source pps database reference date january the ages of four suspects are not known. the age of one suspect is not known. the age of one suspect is not known. one suspect is a legal entity. one suspect is a legal entity and the age of one suspect is not known. the ages of two suspects are not known. one suspect is a legal entity and the ages of two suspects are not known. two suspects are legal entities and the ages of two suspects are not known. five suspects are legal entities and the ages of twelve suspects are not known. additional tables table b . average age of convicted offenders average age number n standard deviation total source pps database reference date january the ages of two suspects are not known. the age of one suspect is not known. the age of one suspect is not known. the ages of four suspects are not known. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . country of birth of suspects country of birth of suspects total top n n n n n n n n n n r afghanistan albania angola australia belgium brazil bulgaria cameroon cape verde china including hong kong colombia congo formerly zaire former czechoslovakia dominican republic egypt estonia ethiopia france germany former east germany and former west germany ghana including gold coast greece guinea honduras hungary india including former portuguese india additional tables table b . country of birth of suspects country of birth of suspects total top n n n n n n n n n n r afghanistan albania angola australia belgium brazil bulgaria cameroon cape verde china including hong kong colombia congo formerly zaire former czechoslovakia dominican republic egypt estonia ethiopia france germany former east germany and former west germany ghana including gold coast greece guinea honduras hungary india including former portuguese india trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring country of birth of suspects total top n n n n n n n n n n r indonesia former netherlands east indies international area iran iraq ireland israel italy ivory coast jordan former korea kuwait latvia lebanon liberia libya lithuanai malaysia including former british borneo mongolia morocco netherlands netherlandse antilles niger nigeria pakistan philippines poland portugal romania continued table b . additional tables country of birth of suspects total top n n n n n n n n n n r indonesia former netherlands east indies international area iran iraq ireland israel italy ivory coast jordan former korea kuwait latvia lebanon liberia libya lithuanai malaysia including former british borneo mongolia morocco netherlands netherlandse antilles niger nigeria pakistan philippines poland portugal romania trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring country of birth of suspects total top n n n n n n n n n n r saudi arabia sierra leone somalia south africa former soviet union sudan surinam syria thailand tunisia turkey uganda united kingdom united states venezuela vietnam former yugoslavia n. a. legal entity unknown total source pps database reference date january dark blue shading this country of birth was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this country of birth is in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more of the suspects registered by the pps in at least one of the years were born in this country. is not in the top overall but ten or more of the suspects registered by the pps in at least one of the years were born in this country. continued table b . additional tables country of birth of suspects total top n n n n n n n n n n r saudi arabia sierra leone somalia south africa former soviet union sudan surinam syria thailand tunisia turkey uganda united kingdom united states venezuela vietnam former yugoslavia n. a. legal entity unknown total source pps database reference date january dark blue shading this country of birth was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this country of birth is in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more of the suspects registered by the pps in at least one of the years were born in this country. is not in the top overall but ten or more of the suspects registered by the pps in at least one of the years were born in this country. trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring table b . country of birth of convicted offenders country of birth of offenders total top n n n n n n n n n n r afghanistan albania angola belgium brazil bulgaria cape verde colombia former czechoslovakia dominican republic egypt estonia germany including former german federal republic ghana greece guinea hungary india indonesia former netherlands east indies international area iran iraq ivory coast jordan former korea kuwait latvia liberia lithuania morocco additional tables table b . country of birth of convicted offenders country of birth of offenders total top n n n n n n n n n n r afghanistan albania angola belgium brazil bulgaria cape verde colombia former czechoslovakia dominican republic egypt estonia germany including former german federal republic ghana greece guinea hungary india indonesia former netherlands east indies international area iran iraq ivory coast jordan former korea kuwait latvia liberia lithuania morocco trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring country of birth of offenders total top n n n n n n n n n n r netherlands netherlands antilles nigeria pakistan poland romania sierra leone former soviet union sudan surinam thailand tunisia turkey united kingdom united states former yugoslavia former zaire unknown total source pps database reference date january dark blue shading this country of birth was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this country of birth is in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more of the persons convicted in first instance in at least one of the years were born in this country. continued table b . additional tables country of birth of offenders total top n n n n n n n n n n r netherlands netherlands antilles nigeria pakistan poland romania sierra leone former soviet union sudan surinam thailand tunisia turkey united kingdom united states former yugoslavia former zaire unknown total source pps database reference date january dark blue shading this country of birth was in the top in the relevant year the ranking is shown between brackets after the number or this country of birth is in the top overall the ranking is shown in the last column . is not in the top overall but five or more of the persons convicted in first instance in at least one of the years were born in this country. a list of activities of bnrm in interviews meetings and working visits netherlands . police royal netherlands marechaussee special investigative services centre of expertise on human trafficking and migrant smuggling emm national expert group on human trafficking lem operational consultation group on trafficking in human beings oom police academy police in someren regional police force for brabant zuid oost . public prosecution service b working group financial environmental and food safety offences office chief public prosecutor financial environmental and food safety offences office department of policy and strategy national office public prosecutor for migrant smuggling and human trafficking chief public prosecutor amsterdam national consultative body of public prosecutors for human trafficking and migrant smuggling procurator general with the human trafficking portfolio various meetings were held with some of the listed individuals and agencies sometimes in different compositions and in the context of different meetings. periodic meetings that are regularly attended by bnrm are marked . meetings at which bnrm made a contribution in the form of a presentation are marked . trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring . judiciary attendance at various court sessions national consultative body for presidents of criminal divisions of courts lovs council for the judiciary the hague district court president of the criminal division of the hague district court and chairman of lovs presidents of the immigration law sections of the district courts president of the children s court judges working group . social services victim support groups and ngos blinn youth care agency the hague coa review committee for the development of a methodology for protected shelter comensha fier fryslan iom okia platform comensha pmw humanitas rotterdam rode draad spirit meisa acm nidos municipality of amsterdam meisa pilot project on human trafficking stichting jade municipalities of schipborg and assen . government semi state sector and politics labour inspectorate labour market fraud department intervention team for retail trade in hengelo municipality of amsterdam managing director ind focus group workshop for municipalities minister of the interior and kingdom relations ministry of the interior and kingdom relations department of police and security regions ministry of the interior and kingdom relations directorate for general security ministry of foreign affairs department of cabinet and protocol and blinn ministry of foreign affairs and ministry of justice minister of justice ministry of justice custodial institutions agency juvenile affairs department ministry of justice director of individual juvenile affairs list of activities of bnrm in ministry of justice directorate for the administration of justice and law enforcement organised crime department ministry of justice interdepartmental consultation group on human trafficking ministry of social affairs and employment director general for administration enforcement and operations ministry of social affairs and employment blinn comensha ministry of social affairs and employment director of labour relations ministry of social affairs and employment siod ministry of social affairs and employment director of siod minister for youth and family task force on human trafficking lower house of parliament chairman of the permanent committee for justice . research academia advisory bodies monitoring committee for chinese beauty sector erasmus university rotterdam human rights research and consultancy information meeting on caselex university of leiden department of criminal law and department of criminology university of leiden criminology alumni association university of utrecht faculty of law economics and governance university of amsterdam political science . visits and delegations from abroad aruba and netherlands antilles country coordinators and comensha bulgaria bulgarian national commission for combating trafficking in human beings bulgarian anti human trafficking organisations klpd ipol icmpd associate project officer international federation of the red cross and red crescent societies ifrc and the dutch red cross jordan jordan s ministry of labour and national police force nigeria naptip iom paraguay director general for human rights poland president of the halina niec legal aid centre and la strada poland united arab emirates delegation from various public and private organisations human rights organisations and the public prosecution service united arab emirates delegation from various organizations arranged by the bridging the gulf foundation sweden national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring congresses symposia study days and lectures netherlands de lunchclub a lecture club for women the hague lecture on trafficking in human beings the hague january municipality of rotterdam municipal approach national responsibility signing of agreement on human trafficking rotterdam february bnrm expert meeting complaints b with few leads for investigation the hague february bnrm and university of utrecht conference on human trafficking turning our attention to labour exploitation utrecht february ciroc seminar chinese and chinese organised crime amsterdam february defence for children international nederland kick off meeting for building blocks for children s rights. further with the recommendations of the un children s rights committee the hague february lecture club lecture on human trafficking the hague march tijdschrift voor criminologie nederlandse vereniging voor kriminologie discussion qualitative research in criminology willem pompe institute utrecht march aliens police theme day on other forms of exploitation utrecht march voorziening tot samenwerking vts politie nederland cope amsterdam conference a conference on interoperability and information exchange of police forces of the eu member states amsterdam march defence for children expert panel on the annual report on children s rights amsterdam april flarenetwork.org meeting season of legality the hague april studiecentrum kerckebosch practical day on customising the bibob instruments ede wageningen april ministry of the interior and kingdom relations police forces police quality agency police academy nik day information led policing how do we stand ede april police academy seminar in nigerian criminal networks apeldoorn may ministry of foreign affairs lecture by former director of naptip the hague may shop conference human trafficking. a problem without borders . the hague may the hague district court lecture by j. de wijkerslooth de weerdesteyn on the framework decision on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings the hague june ssr course on human trafficking zutphen june and november list of activities of bnrm in task force on human trafficking working visit by minister of justice human trafficking and official presentation of the action plan of the task force on human trafficking rotterdam july national office of the public prosecution service first national meeting of regional holders of the human trafficking and migrant smuggling portfolio the hague september blinn symposium on chinese victims of human trafficking amsterdam september medilex national study day on loverboys utrecht september university of amsterdam guest lecture for master s programme in political science amsterdam october nvvr roundtable meeting on european asylum law the hague october blinn opening of exhibition bought and sold voices of human trafficking the hague october bnrm and task force on human trafficking theme day on human trafficking and presentation of the rapporteur s seventh report utrecht october wik annual meeting of integral chain working group amsterdam november ministry of social affairs and employment theme day beyond the crisis lessons after the hague november gooische lezingenclub presentation for the gooische lezingenclub hilversum november police academy national meeting in police data act nieuwegein november iflry seminar on human trafficking i am not for sale amsterdam november unicef summit on children s rights leiden november siod presentation on case law on other forms of exploita tion for cie siod the hague november police academy theme day on financial investigations apeldoorn november klpd theme day on crime analysis ede december swedish embassy in the netherlands ministry of foreign affairs and the ministry of defence women in war zones second swedish dutch conference on gender equality the hague december university of leiden pao course in human trafficking leiden december trafficking in human beings ten years of independent monitoring movisie national congress in combating juvenile prostitution utrecht december ecp platform for internet security kick off for platform on internet security the hague december university of leiden oration by professor j. van der leun leiden december ministry of justice mid term conference tackling serious forms of nuisance together the hague december international working visits congresses and other activities iom and federal ministry of the interior austria final ministerial conference guidelines for the collection of data on trafficking in human beings including comparable indicators vienna february icmpd and the ministerstvo vnutra slovenskej republiky thb data collection and harmonised information management systems dcim eu nd project team and advisory board meeting warsaw march ministry of the interior of the czech republic joint analysis joint action conference of eu national rapporteurs on trafficking in human beings prague march osce conference alliance against trafficking in persons technical alliance export coordination team vienna april osce conference alliance against trafficking in persons technical seminar on trafficking for labour exploitation focusing on the agricultural sector vienna april home affairs committee international seminar on combating human trafficking london may ministry of justice sweden iom st national networking meeting towards global eu action against trafficking in human beings stockholm may crime prevention department of the ministry of the interior of the czech republic expert conference preventing and combating trafficking in human beings reducing prostituti on and sexual exploitation. pilsen june european commission directorate general justice freedom and security informal meeting of national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms on trafficking in human beings brussels june osce high level seminar on trafficking in human beings ashgabad august prosecutor general s office of ukraine and the ukrainian association of prosecutors th annual conference and general meeting of the international association of prosecutors kiev september list of activities of bnrm in ministry of justice sweden iom nd steering committee meeting towards global eu action against trafficking in human beings vienna september osce prevention of modern slavery an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure vienna september ilo technical consultation on the use of trafficking indicators for prosecution lisbon september institute for international research on criminal policy expert meeting montrasec brussels october task force on human trafficking working visit by task force on human trafficking to the netherlands antilles october ministry of justice sweden iom and payoke eu ministerial conference towards global eu action against trafficking in human beings brussels october ariadne european human rights funders network and european foundation centre the intelligent funders guide to the human rights architecture of europe brussels november centre for parliamentary studies tackling child trafficking and exploitation in the eu brussels december institute for international research on criminal policy working visit montrasec ghent december 