 united nations office on drugs and crime forum on crime and society volume guest editor kristiina kangaspunta special issue researching hidden populations approaches to and methodologies for generating data on trafficking in persons united nations new york inner e ck hk.indd views expressed in signed articles published in forum on crime and society are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the secretariat of the united nations. the designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the secretariat of the united nations concerning the legal status of any country territory city or area or of its authori ties or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers and boundaries. united nations june . all rights reserved worldwide. requests for permission to reproduce this work are welcomed and should be sent to the secretary of the publications board united nations headquarters new york n.y. u.s.a. or also see the website of the board https unp.un.org rights.aspx. governments and their institutions may reproduce this work without prior authorization but are requested to mention the source and inform the united nations of such reproduction. publishing production english publishing and library section united nations office at vienna. united nations publication sales no. e. .iv. isbn eisbn issn inner e ck hk.indd iii preface forum on crime and society is a united nations sales publication issued by the united nations office on drugs and crime unodc based in vienna. it is published in the six official languages of the united nations arabic chinese english french russian and spanish. forum presents policy oriented articles on crime prevention and criminal jus tice. it focuses on trends and practices in the field of criminal justice that are of special significance to the international community. the present issue of forum is devoted to research approaches to and methodologies for generating data on trafficking in persons. it is the ninth issue of forum to be published and widely distributed to a varied readership. past issues of forum are available on the unodc website www.unodc.org unodc en data and analysis forum on crime and society.html . all contributions to this issue of forum have been written by the authors in their personal capacity and should not be regarded as official views or posi tions of the institutions they represent. unodc wishes to thank sonja busch for her assistance in preparing the present issue of forum. since when the general assembly in its resolution adopted the united nations global plan of action to combat trafficking in persons unodc has been assigned to collect relevant data and report on trafficking in persons in particular on the patterns and flows of such trafficking at the national regional and global levels. even though the importance of including statistics in an approach to tackling human trafficking is widely acknowledged in international legal and public documents it is also recognized that there is still a scarcity of knowledge on the total scale of such trafficking. in preparing the global report on trafficking in persons unodc is faced with several challenges such as definitional ambiguity and the absence of primary data collection based on sound sampling and documentation procedures in the participating states. despite the internationally accepted legal definition of trafficking in persons established in the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations inner e ck hk.indd iv convention against transnational organized crime a in practice there are various interpretations of what constitutes such trafficking. the use of differ ent interpretations such as who are the victims of such trafficking where can they be found and what are trafficking violations makes it difficult to com pare data at the international level. the different quality and documentation of procedures contribute to the difficulty of estimating the global scope of the problem the biggest challenge being the hidden nature of such trafficking. the long term vision of unodc is to know more about the hidden side of the phenomenon of trafficking in persons and to facilitate the development of more innovative research approaches in order to receive more sound data from states. for this reason an expert workshop on research in trafficking in persons was organized in vienna from to december . participants were researchers with experience conducting quantitative or qualitative stud ies in different areas reaching hidden populations. the objectives of the meeting were to discuss the quantitative and qualitative aspects of new research methodologies and to develop concrete ideas and recommendations to be used by unodc to improve its research on patterns and flows of human trafficking at the national regional and global levels. this issue of forum is aimed at presenting the variety of research approaches and findings to a broader public and contributing to a discourse on how to obtain through research more sound data on the different aspects of traffick ing in persons. concrete recommendations by the participating authors include using existing international and national surveys for analysis taking advantage of existing data collection vehicles especially in industrialized countries encouraging the collection and analysis of data in microlevel settings and not relying on current estimates carefully defining indicators of human trafficking with common a trafficking in persons shall mean the recruitment transportation transfer harbouring or receipt of persons by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion of abduction of fraud of deception of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation. exploitation shall include at a minimum the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation forced labour or services slavery or practices similar to slavery servitude or the removal of organs general assembly resolution annex ii article . inner e ck hk.indd v characteristics to allow for the development of common counter measures reflecting all international legal frameworks establishing a global test databank to host various examples of traf ficking instruments together with their supporting documents and validation studies the articles presented in this volume of forum deal with challenges and solu tions in collecting research data on trafficking in persons and presenting quantitative and qualitative aspects in reaching hidden populations and how to use them for research on such trafficking. editorial policy and guidelines for publication the editorial board invites scholars and experts from around the world to contribute articles to forum on criminological and socio legal issues. articles submitted for publication must be original that is they should not have been published elsewhere. the length of manuscripts to be considered for publica tion as articles should not exceed words. manuscripts should be sub mitted in electronic format and preferably also in hard copy and should be accompanied by the curriculum vitae of the author and an abstract. all manuscripts reviews and correspondence should be addressed to the managing editor of forum either by mail policy analysis and research branch united nations office on drugs and crime p.o. box vienna austria or by e mail forum unodc.org . kristiina kangaspunta chief of the global report on trafficking in persons unit united nations office on drugs and crime inner e ck hk.indd inner e ck hk.indd vii contents page preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii estimating human trafficking worldwide a multi mode strategy jan van dijk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers ieke de vries and corinne dettmeijer vermeulen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement sheldon x. zhang and li cai . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers thomas m. steinfatt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . proposed utilization of the network scale up method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons janie f. shelton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo mapping techniques kelle barrick wayne j. pitts joseph p. mcmichael william d. wheaton and brian m. evans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology with a discussion of the international labour organization s global estimate of forced labour peter g.m. van der heijden ieke de vries dankmar b hning and maarten cruyff . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking fabrizio sarrica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . inner e ck hk.indd inner e ck hk.indd estimating human trafficking worlwide a multi mode strategy by jan van dijk abstract in this article the author presents the results of an in depth analysis of the production of statistics by eurostat on formally identified victims of traffick ing in human beings in europe. he concludes that the concept of an identi fied victim of trafficking in human beings has different meanings in different european union member states and that the identification process is organ ized differently as well. on the basis of those regional results he argues that statistics on the number of recorded victims of human trafficking cannot be used as a reliable measurement of the extent of trafficking in human beings in a country neither in the european union nor elsewhere. as follow up to this critical assessment the author argues in favour of a worldwide programme for the collection of survey based estimates of human trafficking and to that end pre sents a methodological strategy combining various modes of data collection. keynotes identification of victims of trafficking in human beings eurostat cross country differences dark number studies multi mode strategies. introductory remarks international legal instruments on human trafficking such as the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transna tional organized crime are explicitly victim focused. their ultimate aim is to reduce the number of persons especially women and children victim ized by this type of crime. in addition these instruments seek to improve the provision of services to identified victims. considering these aims the special interest in collecting international statistics on victims of human trafficking is obvious. such statistics are important for monitoring the impact of the traf ficking in persons protocol which when properly implemented should result in lower numbers of victims of human trafficking and a higher proportion of such victims being adequately served. tilburg university the netherlands. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume the collection of international statistics on crime is challenging due to vary ing legal definitions reporting patterns and recording practices. for this rea son official figures on police recorded crime are increasingly seen as input statistics of criminal justice systems that cannot and should not be used to measure the level of crime or trends in crime . in spite of this statis tics on the number of recorded victims of human trafficking continue to be collected by among others the united nations office on drugs and crime unodc and eurostat. the present article contains the results of an in depth analysis of the produc tion of such statistics in europe. building on those results and a paper by seo young cho the author argues that statistics on the number of recorded victims of human trafficking should be seen as an imperfect meas urement of the performance of policies to counter such trafficking or failure to implement such policies rather than as a measurement of the phenomenon of human trafficking. in line with this assessment the author argues in favour of introducing a worldwide programme to collect estimates of human traffick ing that could supersede the tentative estimates of the international labour organization ilo and to that end presents a methodological strategy for the collection of such data. counting identified victims official crime statistics from police forces or courts are case or offender directed and do not normally provide information on the number of victims of crime recorded by the authorities. in the case of human trafficking this problem has to some extent been overcome by the introduction in many countries of mechanisms for the identification of victims of human traffick ing. the author is not aware of mechanisms for the identification of any other type of crime. the increasing number of mechanisms for the identification of victims of human trafficking prompted unodc to collect statistics on the number of officially identified victims for its global reports on trafficking in persons. it should be noted however that the trafficking in persons protocol itself is silent on the identification of victims. after the adoption of the proto col in the concept of identifying victims in the framework of a national referral mechanism was elaborated in a handbook of the office for demo cratic institutions and human rights of the organization for security and co operation in europe . the concept has subsequently found its way into several regional legal instruments prime examples of which are the council of europe convention on action against trafficking in human beings opened for signature at warsaw on may and directive eu inner e ck hk.indd estimating human trafficking worldwide a multi mode strategy of the european parliament and the council of the european union on pre venting and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims. both of these european instruments oblige states parties or member states to establish appropriate mechanisms for the early identification of victims. the directive also instructs states to provide assistance and protection as soon as there are reasonable grounds to presume that someone is a victim of human trafficking a so called presumed victim . the latter obligation implies that in all european union member states appropriate mechanisms must be in place for identifying victims of human trafficking as well as mech anisms for identifying presumed victims. the existence of legal obligations to identify victims of human trafficking makes the european region a test case for the collection of comparable statis tics on identified victims. in this region the legal and institutional conditions for the collection of such statistics seem relatively favourable. in euro stat for the first time requested member states to use a questionnaire to report on inter alia numbers of identified and presumed victims. to what extent has this regional statistical exercise been successful in a study commissioned by the european commission a team of scholars that included the author of this article made an in depth assessment of the victim statistics collected by eurostat . it appears that the number of victims per population shows extreme variation ranging from lows of . in hungary lithuania and portugal to highs of . in bulgaria . in the netherlands and . in cyprus. can these national figures be seen as a proxy of the extent of the phenome non is human trafficking indeed most prevalent in bulgaria cyprus and the netherlands the first observation of the research team was that the guidance given by eurostat to national respondent on the meaning of the concept of an identi fied or presumed victim was far from clear cut. even in the european context the concept has remained largely undefined. fifteen european union mem ber states have reported on identified victims only. ten member states have reported on both identified and presumed victims and two member states have reported on presumed victims only. in the eurostat report identified and assumed victims have been added up to yield the total for each country and for the european union. that has led to further variation in the meaning of the victim statistics. the directive does not specify what identification mechanisms should be established nor does the council of europe convention. at this juncture national referral mechanisms do not exist in all member states and existing national referral mechanisms show considerable variation. for a critical review see prevent combat protect human trafficking joint un commentary on the eu directive a human rights based approach . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume the fact that identification mechanisms are in place provides no assurance that the recorded numbers of victims are comparable. just as statistics on police recorded crimes are strongly dependent on the surveillance and inves tigative efforts of police forces the numbers of persons identified as victims are strongly influenced by the efforts of police forces border control agencies labour inspectorates and non governmental organizations ngos to detect or reach out to victims. the reports of the monitoring body of the convention on action against trafficking in human beings the group of experts on action against trafficking in human beings greta reveal great variation in the funds and human resources available for victim assistance or action to counter such trafficking. to complicate matters further the formal identifica tion of victims unlike statistics of police recorded crimes has been put into the hands of very different institutions. the reports note that although the police are the principal source of information on identified or presumed vic tims in the european union this is not the general rule. nine european union member states obtained such information from ngos and obtained such information from a variety of other sources. the other sources showed wide variation state run social services in denmark and sweden reception centres in finland victim services in poland prosecutors social services and international organizations in romania a special agency acting as a clearing house for presumed victims in the netherlands and portugal and local authorities regional councils and social services in the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland. the results of the study reveal a stunning variation in what the concepts of identified and presumed victims actually mean within the institutional con text of a country. some examples may suffice to convey the scope of variation. in sweden statistics can be retrieved from ngos but the official statistics on victims are derived from irrevocable court convictions for human trafficking. since many suspected cases of trafficking are never solved by the police and brought before a court the swedish statistics can be seen as the most mini malist victim statistics imaginable. in most other countries stand alone mechanisms for victim identification are in operation. one of the most elaborate mechanisms is run in the united kingdom. british statistics given to eurostat refer to victims definitely identified through the national referral mechanism either by the specialized unit within the police or by the border agency. victims who have been provisionally identified by these agencies on a reasonable grounds basis but whose victim status is not confirmed later in the process are left out although most of them have received assistance for months. if they had been included as presumed vic tims the total number for the united kingdom would have been almost twice as high. inner e ck hk.indd estimating human trafficking worldwide a multi mode strategy in belgium the concept of an identified victim refers to third country nation als who were granted a recovery period or residence permit by the immigra tion authorities upon the decision of the prosecutor and who have been received by any of the three dedicated reception centres in the country. these formally identified victims make up just a small part of all victims of traffick ing because nationals of belgium and other european union member states are not included. for this reason belgium is one of the five countries where relatively few victims have been identified and where many more victims have received assistance according to the statistics provided. austria and germany report on victims identified by the police excluding victims who have received assistance from ngos without formal identifica tion by the police. in ireland a national referral mechanism is in operation but since it is not functioning the numbers of recorded victims refer to all victims who have been in contact with the specialized unit within the police. the examples mentioned above yield statistics that exclude certain categories of victims and should be seen as deflated statistics. an example of possibly inflated statistics or overcounting is found in the netherlands. the nether lands has reported on the number of victims recorded by an ngo comensha operating on behalf of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children as an observatory or clearing house for all relevant state institutions and ngos encountering persons showing any signs of being possible victims of human trafficking. these vic tims are counted as presumed victims. this recording mechanism covers many more victims than those formally identified by the police or immigra tion authorities in the framework of the national identification mechanism for victims who are irregularly residing in the country governed by immigration regulation b vc . according to the evaluation report of greta france has not yet established a formal identification mechanism for victims of human trafficking. the num ber of victims reported on by france seem to be taken from police adminis trations and to include victims of pimping or victims of smuggling of migrants. the statistics previously provided by spain to eurostat are likewise based on police administrations and those statistics also seem to be lacking in specific ity. they undercount by missing many victims of human trafficking and over count by including victims of other types of offences. in germany representatives of the ngo community resist exchanges of data on victims with state agencies to ensure the highest possible degree of confidentiality . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume the examples above show that the numbers of victims identified are not only dependent on the efforts of the key institutions involved in identification but that on top of this the concept of an identified or presumed victim is inter preted by the european union member states in such diverging ways as to seriously compromise the comparability of the resulting statistics on persons so defined. the scope and outreach of the national mechanisms of identifica tion vary widely ranging from identification through a final conviction of the trafficker by a criminal court in sweden to the identification of any person showing signs of being a possible victim according to police officers ngos or labour inspectors in the netherlands. the ranking of individual countries in terms of numbers of identified or presumed victims does not therefore reflect the relative size of or trends in the phenomenon of human trafficking. the author fully agrees with the caveat included in the eurostat report that more reported cases do not necessarily mean an increase in the actual num ber of victims p. . if the statistics on identified victims collected by eurostat cannot be reliably used as a comparative measurement of human trafficking what does this imply for the statistics on victims collected by unodc given the absence of any formal obligation of states parties to the trafficking in persons proto col to establish and maintain identification mechanisms and the absence of a definition of the concept of identification in the unodc questionnaire it can safely be concluded that the concept of identified victims will be even more heterogeneous among the member states of the united nations than among the member states of the european union. on the basis of the euro pean test case the author concludes that statistics of identified victims of human trafficking cannot and should not be used as a comparative measure ment of the phenomenon of human trafficking. counting identified victims for what a critical assessment of the validity of statistics on victims begs the question for what purposes are such statistics collected using econometric analysis one of the experts participating in the above mentioned study tested whether in her presentation at the expert meeting of the project on tools for the validation and utilization of european union statistics on human trafficking trafstat held in amsterdam in september the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children in the netherlands corinne dettmeijer vermeulen made the point that victim identification is strongly driven by awareness among relevant officials. she presented data showing that the surge in presumed or identified victims in the netherlands between and was mainly driven by greater awareness among the border police resulting in many more reports to comensha of suspected cases of trafficking . inner e ck hk.indd estimating human trafficking worldwide a multi mode strategy the number of identified or presumed victims can be used as a proxy indica tor for the policy efforts of countries to address human trafficking . her results confirmed that the higher the quantifiable input to address human trafficking such as available police officers the higher the number of identi fied or presumed victims. she suggested including such statistics in indices of policies to counter human trafficking such as those developed by van dijk and klerx van mierlo rather than in indices of the extent of human trafficking. this finding can be illustrated by the comparatively high number of victims in the netherlands. according to the greta report on the netherlands the country complies better with international standards and invests more in detection and prosecution education and victim protection than almost all other countries evaluated so far. in conclusion the high num ber of identified victims of human trafficking in the netherlands reflects the quality of the policies to counter such trafficking rather than the extent of the phenomenon. just as statistics on the number of identified victims are often erroneously used as an indication of the extent of the phenomenon in a country statistics showing the gender age nationality or type of exploitation of the victims are all too frequently used as an indication of the nature of human trafficking in a country rather than as an indication of the priorities within the national policies to counter such trafficking. extreme values for factors such as the age of victims may reveal special patterns in a country but they should primarily be used to raise questions about the focus of national policies. for example there is a relatively low proportion of registered minors in austria cyprus the czech republic denmark finland hungary latvia lithuania poland slovakia and slovenia is trafficking in minors very rare in those countries or is it simply overlooked by the authorities in the author s opinion such devi ant values primarily beg the question of whether the identification of victims who are minors is receiving sufficient attention. another example is the rela tively low proportion of male victims in germany and hungary the low value may suggest that national policies focus more on sexual exploitation and less on labour exploitation. in finland the relatively low number of identified victims of sexual exploitation may be an indication that policies are focused solely on labour exploitation. the proportion of nationals among identified victims shows similar divergence in the destination countries germany and the netherlands the proportion of identified or presumed victims who were nationals of germany and the netherlands were and per cent respec tively this finding is in line with the general conclusion in a unodc report that one in every four victims between and was a national of the country where he or she was exploited p. . however most other destination countries in the european union show a much lower pro portion. the latter finding begs the question of whether those countries inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume identification and detection systems are sufficiently geared towards victims of trafficking in those countries. deviant values in these and other statistics on victims deserve further scrutiny because they may be the result of existing policies or be peculiarities or defi ciencies of the national policies regarding certain forms of human trafficking. only after such examination can such values be interpreted as reflecting spe cial patterns in human trafficking in a country. beyond counting identified victims for lack of research based knowledge on the true volume of victims of human trafficking in the world the latest ilo estimate of . million victims of forced labour per year is the best available estimate and the most widely quoted one . estimates have also been made by ilo for regions including europe. using the european union estimate fairwork an ngo in the netherlands has calculated an estimate of the real number of trafficking vic tims in the netherlands. the ilo estimates are produced in two stages. the first stage consists of a sophisticated extrapolation of the number of recorded victims of labour exploitation in public reports using the capture recapture formula. the second stage consists of extrapolating those estimates of recorded victims to estimate the real number of victims on the basis of sur veys on exploitative experiences of returned migrants in four countries in the caucasus. in the final analysis the global regional and national estimates are based on the multiplication of the estimated numbers of recorded victims by a factor derived from survey research on labour exploitation conducted in a handful of small countries in one subregion. it should therefore be best regarded as a sophisticated guesstimate rather than as a reliable measure. the true number of victims is certainly many times higher than the number of identified victims but there is as yet no basis for determining how much higher. the sole method for estimating the true volume of various forms of human trafficking in the world would entail conducting large scale surveys among risk groups about their personal experiences during the past one or two years in a sample of member states. standardized surveys on victims of types of common crime have been carried out worldwide . a pilot study for a survey on experiences with trafficking or exploitation could be modelled after these earlier dark number studies regarding other types of complex criminality and after the pioneering ilo surveys on labour exploitation men tioned above. pilot studies on the extent of criminal exploitation among migrant workers have also been carried out in the united states of america inner e ck hk.indd estimating human trafficking worldwide a multi mode strategy with funding from the department of justice . in the netherlands the ministry of labour and social affairs has commissioned a similar pilot study among migrant workers. innovative studies have also been conducted with the aim of estimating the prevalence of exploitative practices in the sex indus try in countries such as cambodia the netherlands and the united kingdom . estimating the number of victims of human trafficking worldwide a proposal conducting dark number studies to determine the true number of trafficking victims in the world would require funds and human resources that are unlikely to be made available in the near future. as an alternative the author has devised a research strategy that would allow the international community to arrive at tentative but credible estimates without requiring unrealistically large financial resources. this strategy seeks to combine results from various sources in a selection of countries representative of the main regions of the world africa asia europe north america south america and oceania . three test countries would be selected from each of the regions preferably countries with large populations. as the first step of this strategy a research team would need to collect from existing sources in each of the test countries estimates of the stock of work ers in illegal non sex labour markets and of the stock of sex workers. in most countries such estimates can be retrieved from existing publications. in some countries this may require the commissioning of ad hoc studies. as a second step surveys on criminal exploitation modelled after the ilo surveys in the caucasus and the study conducted by zhang in the united states would be carried out in each of the countries. separate studies would need to be conducted on the exploitation of vulnerable groups such as illegal migrant workers who are not sex workers and on the exploitation of sex workers. although some of these studies may need to be commissioned by the research team it is to be expected that over the years the results of such studies in an increasing number of countries would become available. the availability of such results could be a criterion in the selection of the test countries. the second step of the strategy would yield estimates of the proportion of sex workers and other illegal workers who are exploited in each of the test coun tries. as a third step in the strategy the exploitation proportions would be inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume applied to the stocks of illegal workers and sex workers estimated in the first step. this would yield estimates of the total number of persons exploited in non sex labour markets and the sex industry in each test country. using exist ing knowledge on the average duration of exploitation per person e.g. four months in the sex industry and perhaps six month in the other sectors esti mates can subsequently be made of the total number of persons exploited during a period of one year. in the fourth step of the strategy the estimated number of exploited persons per year per country in each of the two categories would be compared with the number of identified victims according to the unodc global report on trafficking in persons. in this way the ratio of the estimated real number of victims to the number of officially identified victims in each country could be calculated. by averaging these ratios and possibly weighting the national ratios according to population size the ratio could be calculated for each of the regions and for the world total. each regional ratio could also be tentatively used to estimate the real number of victims in other individual countries in the region extrapolating from the known number of identified victims. a numerical example to illustrate the proposed multi mode model an example of how the strategy would work out if one of the test countries were the netherlands is provided below. according to available research findings there are illegal migrants working in the country and sex workers. according to a study in amsterdam per cent of the sex workers can be categorized as being victims of criminal exploitation human trafficking . there is less known about the proportion of illegal migrants exploited by their employers. using the results of the study conducted by zhang in the united states the proportion of exploited persons is tentatively put at per cent. on the basis of this it can be assumed that there are victims of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation and per cent of victims of trafficking for labour exploitation. assuming that victims of sexual exploitation are on average exploited for four months this results in an estimate of victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation per year. assuming that the average duration of exploita tion is six months this results in an estimate of victims per year. according to the number of identified victims of sexual exploitation in the netherlands in recent years about per year the ratio between the inner e ck hk.indd estimating human trafficking worldwide a multi mode strategy estimated real number and the official number in the country is . look ing at the low number of formally identified victims of labour exploitation about per year this gives a ratio of roughly . since the number of officially identified victims of sexual exploitation in europe is the real number can be estimated at when the ratio of the netherlands is applied. the number of identified victims of labour exploitation is much lower about . applying the ratio of the netherlands would result in an estimate of the true number of victims . in the proposed strategy the ratio to be applied is not the ratio in a single country but the average ratio of three selected countries in the region. discussion the core of international statistics on trafficking in human beings consists of the numbers of identified and or presumed victims. of all statistics on traf ficking in human beings these are cited the most often. they are in most cases presented as measurements or proxy measurements of the size of the phenomenon. commentators on these numbers often observe that they must be seen as reflecting just the tip of the iceberg. on the basis of the statistics on identified victims the public is informed that human trafficking is a very prevalent humanitarian problem that is still on the increase and therefore needs to be tackled by the government as soon as possible. the use of soft data to estimate the number of identified victims for propagandistic purposes has been criticized on methodological grounds . analysis of the euro stat statistics on victims confirms that such statistics cannot and should not be used as a measurement of the phenomenon . the proper use of such statistics would entail using them as a proxy indicator of the performance of government agencies in their fight against human trafficking with a higher number of identified victims indicating better performance. having said that it should be acknowledged that the use of victim statistics for the purposes of awareness raising and lobbying is fully legitimate. for this reason more knowledge about the true number of victims of human trafficking is urgently needed both for monitoring purposes and for responsible awareness raising. pilot studies of the exposure to exploitative practices of risk populations such as illegal migrant workers or sex workers have yielded encouraging results. in theory it seems feasible to embark on an initiative to conduct standardized dark number studies of victims of human trafficking similar to the interna tional crime victims survey coordinated by the united nations crime and justice research institute between and . in the current situation it may prove difficult to ensure sufficient funding for such global research. as an inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume alternative the author has proposed a strategy that uses a combination of official statistics of identified victims and the results of dark number studies in selected countries as the bases for regional estimates of the true number of victims of trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation and labour exploitation. references . united nations treaty series vol. no. . . jan van dijk john van kesteren and paul smit criminal victimisation in inter national perspective key findings from the icvs and eu ics the hague boom juridische uitgevers . . jan van dijk and andromachi tseloni global overview international trends in victimization and recorded crime in the international crime drop new directions in research jan van dijk andromachi tseloni and graham farrell eds. houndmills basingstoke hampshire palgrave macmillan . . seo young cho towards a comprehensive index on anti trafficking policy an assessment of the p index greta based scorecard and eurostat in counting what counts tools for the validation and utilization of eu statistics on human trafficking international victimology institute university of tilburg pp. . . international labour organization ilo global estimate of forced labour results and methodology geneva international labour office . . organization for security and cooperation in europe office for democratic institutions and human rights national referral mechanism joining efforts to protect the rights of trafficked persons a practical handbook warsaw . . jan van dijk and others counting what counts tools for the validation and utiliza tion of eu statistics on human trafficking tilburg netherlands intervict uni versity of tilburg universitat aut noma de barcelona . . data protection and right to privacy for marginalised groups a new challenge in anti trafficking policies papers presented at the international datact conference organized by kok e.v. and la strada international berlin september . . eurostat trafficking in human beings methodologies and working papers luxembourg publications office of the european union . . c. dettmeijer vermeulen to count or not to count the utilization of statis tics presentation made at the expert meeting of the project on tools for the inner e ck hk.indd estimating human trafficking worldwide a multi mode strategy validation and utilization of european union statistics on human trafficking traf stat amsterdam september . . jan van dijk and fanny klerx van mierlo quantitative indices for anti human trafficking policies based on reports for the u.s. state department and the council of europe crime law and social change vol. no. february pp. . . sheldon x. zhang looking for a hidden population trafficking of migrant labour ers in san diego county san diego california san diego state university . . global report on trafficking in persons united nations publication sales no. e. .iv. . . anton van wijk and others vulnerable profession a study into the amsterdam prostitution branch summary frans van rossum transl. amsterdam bureau beke . . united states government accountability office human trafficking better data strategy and reporting needed to enhance u.s. anti trafficking efforts abroad gao report gao washington d.c. july . . ann jordan fact of fiction what do we really know about human trafficking issue paper washington d.c. american university washington college of law program on human trafficking and forced labor center for human rights and humanitarian law may . . dita vogel tip of the iceberg improving the interpretation and presentation of trafficking data policy brief international centre for migration policy develop ment march . . alexis a. aronowitz future possibilities for the utilization of eu statistics on human trafficking in counting what counts tools for the validation and utilization of eu statistics on human trafficking tilburg netherlands international victimology institute university of tilburg pp. . inner e ck hk.indd inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers by ieke de vries and corinne dettmeijer vermeulen abstract the total scale of human trafficking is still unknown. the existing estimates are frequently based on false or unfounded assumptions insufficient and unreliable data and inadequate use of methodologies. yet statistics on the scale of the problem are often used in political debates on for instance what policy on prostitution would be the most effective for combating sexual exploitation. consequently improper comparisons are made of the total scale of human trafficking in various countries. the authors of this article suggest a new perspective on the use of statistics on human trafficking in smaller set tings. on the basis of research by the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children in the netherlands the authors discuss three ways in which statistics are of the utmost importance in the fight against human trafficking in informing policy evidence based pol icy in exposing bottlenecks on the basis of which suggestions can be made to introduce more efficient policies and as a starting point for further research providing answers to questions such as why certain aspects still seem to be underexposed in the fight against human trafficking. keywords national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children human trafficking statistics evidence based policy netherlands. introduction in march years a slave won the academy award for best film. the film is set in the united states of america of the nineteenth century during a period when many people were sold as slaves physically this article is an updated version of four reports of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children in the netherlands . academic researcher working for the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children in the netherlands. national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children in the netherlands. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume exploited tortured and abused. it is widely acknowledged that slavery like practices are not just part of the past about million people world wide live in slavery today according to the director of the film steve mcqueen. his figure is based on the estimate of . million victims made by the international labour organization ilo . more recently the walk free foundation estimated that there are nearly . million victims worldwide . such estimates are often reproduced without examining how researchers arrived at their estimates pp. pp. . the above mentioned estimates have been given significant media attention. in news releases it is often sug gested that although exact figures are not available it is likely that the number of victims of human trafficking is higher rather than lower than the estimated number of such victims see for example sharifi . in numerous academic works the estimates of the total scale of human traf ficking are often considered to be on the conservative side see for example shoaps p. . in a study on the total number of vic tims of slavery and human trafficking in countries in europe datta and bales mention that the size of the dark figure for slavery trafficking crime for most european countries is so large that it suggests a crisis of public policy and law enforcement p. . in reality the total number of trafficked persons as well as offenders who are generally disregarded in estimates is unknown. in this article the authors first explore briefly the complexity of calculat ing the total scale of trafficking in human beings. in various academic works published in recent years efforts have been made to estimate the total scale of trafficking in human beings at the national and international levels see for example international labour organization interna tional labour office walk free foundation bottenberg and oth ers and fairwork . at the present time however there is no with the exception of human trafficking for the purpose of organ removal forced marriage and forced adoption this estimate encompasses the types of exploitation specified in article of the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organized crime p. p. . ilo applied a capture recapture methodology to estimate the number of registered victims. on the basis of four national surveys ilo thereafter calculated which portion of the total population of victims of human trafficking was registered which was . per cent. this percentage was used to calculate the unregistered portion of the population leading to the ilo estimate of . million victims standard error . million . per cent . the range of this estimate is between . million and . million victims. the reliability interval is per cent which means there is still a per cent chance that the estimate does not fall within that range . the national rapporteur critically assessed inter alia the ilo estimate with the purpose of providing suggestions for further improvements pp. . the range of this estimate is between . million and . million victims . inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers systematic methodology for estimating the scale of human trafficking in its entirety see also sarrica p. . the lack of accuracy in estimating the total scale poses problems in creating effective and coherent policies to counter human trafficking pp. p. . nonetheless available figures on the total scale of human trafficking are often used in support of for instance a particular policy on prostitution. the authors show how debates on the most efficient prostitution policy for tackling human trafficking underpin the request for statistics on the total scale of human trafficking. in those debates improper comparisons are often made of the total scale of human trafficking in various countries. as long as reliable estimates on the total scale of trafficking in human beings are absent the authors advocate microlevel quantitative research that allows for the necessary interpretation in concrete settings see also weitzer pp. as quantitative data have proved to be valuable in efforts to tackle human trafficking. the authors also examine the use fulness of statistics on human trafficking in informing policy in exposing bottlenecks in efforts to counter human trafficking and as a guide for fur ther research. the authors conclude that in the absence of reliable esti mates the available statistics on the nature of human trafficking at the national and local levels are more relevant for guiding measures to counter human trafficking. scale statistics for the purpose of this article figures on the total scale of human trafficking are referred to as scale statistics. a basic formula to retrieve scale statistics on human trafficking is as follows the scale of human trafficking is equal to the scale of registered known human trafficking minus the false positives human trafficking that is registered as such but is not in reality human trafficking plus the dark figure of unregistered unknown human trafficking which includes the false negatives human trafficking that is known but is not recognized or registered as such p. . a formula for the total scale of trafficking in human beings is shown in the figure below. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume note the figure does not indicate actual scale ratios. dark figure human trafficking that is unknown false negatives human trafficking that is known to the relevant authorities but is not registered false positives victims or perpetrators who have been registered but in the end may not be victims or perpetrators of the delinquency for what they have been registered registered human trafficking visible human trafficking that is registered by authorities simply said to calculate the total scale of human trafficking accurate data on both the visible part and the invisible part of human trafficking are required. nonetheless the application of the formula is apparently challenging. the difficulty in reaching reliable scale statistics is mainly caused by the challenges researchers face in attempts to measure this phenomenon. there are two main challenges in the application of the formula. first when researching human trafficking it is necessary to deal with hard to reach populations for which the scale and boundaries are unknown and for whom a reliable sam pling frame does not exist p. p. . this factor is not unique to data on human trafficking it appears in data on many other forms of organ ized crime resulting in the crime being underreported . like most other offenders traffickers aim to keep their criminal activities hidden from investigative agencies. yet not every crime is equally hidden. in cases involving trafficking in human beings the victims are not readily inclined to formula for the total scale of trafficking in human beings total scale of human trafficking false negative dark figure false positives registered human trafficking inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers report their perpetrators and therefore tend to be less well documented i.e. they have a larger dark figure whereas in cases involving other forms of crime the victims may be more willing to inform the police. trafficked per sons may be afraid to report their situation to the police they may deny their victimhood or they may not consider themselves as victims pp. p. . second what part of human trafficking is visible known and registered depends to a great extent on independent factors that have no direct link with the actual scale of human trafficking. for instance despite the interna tionally accepted legal definition of trafficking in persons established in the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organized crime in practice there are different interpretations of what constitutes such trafficking p. pp. p. p. pp. . by way of illustration in some countries moral attitudes may imply that prostitution is by definition regarded as human trafficking. consequently the data that are collected might be based on a wider interpretation of human trafficking than the one adopted in countries such as the netherlands where prostitution is not crimi nalized pp. . in general the availability nature and scope of data on human trafficking depend on the underlying legal instruments that crimi nalize and define such trafficking. as such an absence of specific legislation causes that no standardized information will be available pp. . other factors such as the priorities set by authorities in tackling human trafficking the capacity that is made available public attention for human trafficking changes in legislation the research methods and research facili ties used to report on the crime and financial resources affect both the avail ability of quantitative data and what kind of data can be collected in a country pp. and pp. p. see in the context of other types of crime aebi and others aebi bennett and lynch farrington langan and tonry howard and smith and soares . the issue of false positives deserves special attention. very few researchers refer to false positives when determining the visible part of human trafficking for an example of researchers who do mention false positives see zhang and others p. . nonetheless the mapping of false positives is extremely challenging because of different and continuously changing interpretations of the concepts of victims and perpetrators . thus the framing of human trafficking in a specific period provides the basis of what is known about such trafficking. hence changing attitudes about and interpretations of the con cept of human trafficking most likely result in living statistics referring to inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume statistics that change over time and retrospectively see in the context of statistics on murder bovenkerk and hogewind p. . as a matter of fact what person a considers to be cases of human trafficking may be to person b cases of for instance domestic violence and considered as false positives. this dilemma may be even more apparent when it comes to count ing victims of human trafficking since victimhood is a highly sensitive and politicized concept. indeed the label victim of trafficking is occasionally used for other matters such as defending moral ideologies and political agendas that are not necessarily related to fighting human trafficking . the total scale of human trafficking can only be estimated. given the chal lenges that are inherent to human trafficking including the challenges that have been mentioned above standard methods of estimation cannot be used. it is difficult to estimate the total number of trafficked persons. the existing estimates are frequently based on false or unfounded assumptions or are inac curate because of insufficient and unreliable data and inadequate use of methodologies pp. p. . by extension instruments that attempt to rank countries on the prevalence of human traf ficking see for example walk free foundation give a distorted picture of the actual extent and nature of human trafficking. as for the global slavery index which ranks countries on the prevalence of slavery defined most broadly as human trafficking forced labour and slavery most of the criticism refers to the use of a medley of unstandardized and thus noncom parable sources p. . the request for scale statistics from debates on prostitution policy the request for scale statistics across countries is reinforced by current politi cal debates about what would be the most efficient policy for countering human trafficking. one frequently asked question in these debates is whether the legalization of prostitution generates more human trafficking. often in these debates improper comparisons are made of the total scale of human trafficking in various countries . several scholars tackling this difficult question found evidence that certain prostitution policies have an impact on the prevalence of human trafficking . in the light of the above cho dreher and neumayer concluded in their research on the extent to which legalized prostitution increases human traf ficking that there is more cross border human trafficking to countries where inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers prostitution has been legalized. this is also what jakobsson and kotsadam concluded in their article . in order to reach their conclusion the authors of both articles conducted cross sectional research. however cross sectional research provides no indication of the impact of changes in legislation on prostitution in a particular period. therefore the authors carried out case studies based on the situations in denmark germany and sweden and in norway and sweden . in those countries legislation on prostitution was amended during the period covered by their studies . while the authors of both articles employed a refined method to reach their conclusions some compelling reservations remain p. . the authors depend on insufficient and partly unreliable data on both the visible part by way of cross sectional research and the invisible part by way of case studies and estimates . three major issues stand out. first and foremost for the cross sectional research the authors relied on data concerning human trafficking situations that were known. however what part of human traf ficking is visible known and registered depends to a great extent on inde pendent factors that have no direct link with the actual scale of human trafficking. second for the dark figure the authors of the above mentioned articles relied on existing estimates among others the ilo estimates pub lished in . as emphasized in the previous section figures on the total scale of human trafficking are still in their infancy particularly when the aim is to inform policy. third the total scale of human trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation is not solely dependent on policies regarding prostitu tion since there are many more push and pull factors that may have an impact on the prevalence of human trafficking. these factors can differ greatly from one country to another . cross sectional research is a snapshot of certain issues since this kind of research looks at a single moment in time. the opposite is longitudinal research where the study is conducted over a certain period in order to document the process. longitudinal research requires a baseline measurement for example how much human trafficking was there before the policy change such baseline measurements however are not always feasible for policy changes that were introduced several years earlier . cho dreher and neumayer used the report trafficking in persons global patterns of the united nations office on drugs and crime unodc to reach the conclusion that a correlation exists between prostitution legislation in a particular country and the reported stream of human trafficking to that country. in addition to the unodc report jakobsson and kotsadam used data from a ilo working paper by danailova trainor and belser . in ilo estimated that in the period there were a minimum of . million victims of forced labour standard error . million victims the range of this estimate is between . million and . million victims . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume evidence based policy by means of quantitative data in the absence of reliable figures on the total scale of human trafficking cross country comparisons on the prevalence of human trafficking still rely on unreliable and inaccurate data. essentially what is left is a hodgepodge of numbers that hardly lend themselves to evidence based policymaking p. . research on the total scale of human trafficking seems to be bounded to among other things particular geographical sites forms of human traffick ing and trafficked persons or traffickers e.g. estimates on prostitutes who are indebted in cambodia . an expansion of the applied research methods raises problems of feasibility p. perhaps because of the diversity of trafficking contexts p. . hence following weitzer s thoughts this article advocates more microlevel research in order to formu late contextually appropriate policy and enforcement responses p. . the importance of including statistics in an approach to tackling human trafficking seems to be widely acknowledged in international legal and pub lic documents including the hague ministerial declaration on euro pean guidelines for effective measures to prevent and combat trafficking in women for the purpose of sexual exploitation and the united nations global plan of action to combat trafficking in persons see also european commission . general assembly resolution see also european commission . in particular in article of directive eu of the european parliament and the council of the european union on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and pro tecting its victims it is stated that member states shall take the necessary measures to establish national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms. the tasks of such mechanisms shall include the carrying out of assessments of trends in trafficking in human beings the measuring of results of anti trafficking actions including the gathering of statistics in close cooperation with relevant civil society organizations active in this field and reporting . in the netherlands the task of reporting on the nature and extent of trafficking is mandated to the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children. the national rapporteur works independently but in close cooperation with relevant stakeholders such as the public prosecution service the national police and civil society which are responsible for a large part of the data on which analyses have been carried out. using as a basis research of the national rapporteur the authors suggest a new perspective on how statistics lay the foundation for guiding measures to counter trafficking. the perspective consists of three parts statistics to inform inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers policy to expose bottlenecks and to be used as a starting point for further research. as such it looks primarily at how figures should be interpreted. in the following examples hardly any statistics will be mentioned since naming them often does not do justice to the complete quantitative studies. a thor ough understanding of statistical analyses requires more qualitative interpre tation. this interpretation in addition to a more detailed description of the methodology and further results can be found in the reports of the national rapporteur . statistics to inform policy first and foremost statistics in general provide a foundation for guiding the measures that can be taken to fight crime see for example hashimoto pp. and . against this background an analysis of a sample of human trafficking investigations that were sent to the public prosecution service in involving suspects and trafficked persons helps determine what policies to fight human trafficking might be most effective pp. . for instance increased insight into human trafficking situa tions the trafficked persons and offenders helps to guide the programmatic approach to countering human trafficking in the netherlands. the program matic approach has been developed by the public prosecution service and rests on two pillars gaining insight into human trafficking and developing innovative methods both preventive and repressive to fight such trafficking. in this approach various units of the public prosecution service and investi gative agencies are cooperating. the so called barrier model is an instru ment used in the programmatic approach to highlight preventive and repressive measures that can be taken to tackle human trafficking. it deter mines the obstacles that perpetrators have to overcome in the human traffick ing process. five initial barriers have been determined on the basis of intelligence that is gathered entry identity accommodation labour and finance pp. and . recruitment lies at the start of the human trafficking process. in order to prevent human trafficking the barriers that should be raised need to focus inter alia on this stage of the human trafficking process. the quantitative analysis of investigations provides knowledge of three specific aspects of the recruitment process that must form part of the barrier model. in the first place preventive measures can be imposed at locations where trafficked per sons were recruited. generally speaking two human trafficking situations in the netherlands can be distinguished those in which most of the trafficked persons have been recruited in the netherlands n and those in which inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume most have been recruited abroad n . a characteristic of human traffick ing situations in which recruitment generally takes place abroad is that both the trafficked persons and the suspects are from countries in central and eastern europe. such a finding highlights the need for operational coopera tion with those countries in order to find ways to prevent trafficking in human beings into the netherlands. when the recruitment took place in the nether lands the trafficked persons were usually from the netherlands and the sus pects were from morocco suriname or turkey although some foreign men and women had also been recruited in the netherlands. the recruitment pro cess in the netherlands mostly occurred in bars and clubs via the internet at school or in prostitution areas in cases involving sexual exploitation . this is where barriers should be raised in order to prevent human trafficking. fur thermore the findings invalidate the idea that traditional recruitment meth ods have entirely been replaced by new means of making contact such as via the internet p. . nonetheless the use of the internet in daily life has seen a significant increase and as a result traffickers of human beings may benefit from social networking sites such as facebook and twitter which seem to be used to facilitate such trafficking for example in recruiting poten tial victims pp. and . at the same time the internet offers new opportunities for intervening p. . a large scale investigation in the united states showed that more than school girls between and years old had been recruited via the internet by members of youth gangs. through the social media gang members came into contact with girls whose status updates showed that they for example had arguments at home or felt lonely. the girls were welcomed into the gangs and received attention that they might not have received at home. in order to really be part of the group the girls had to prostitute themselves after school and before their parents would come home. the gang members encouraged the girls to achieve good results at school. the sophisticated modus operandi of the gang members ensured that hardly anyone had suspicions of human trafficking for further details see national rapporteur s report covering the period pp. national rapporteur s report pp. and ingram . second preventive measures have the challenging task of breaking through the modus operandi of recruiters. in order to do so quantitative and this is the outcome of a two step cluster analysis in which the following factors have been included number of trafficked persons and suspects the sector in which the trafficked persons have been exploited the suspects criminal activities besides human trafficking and whether or not suspects operated within a criminal network of more than two members the latter was supposedly not decisive in forming the two human trafficking situations . some additional analyses have been conducted in order to obtain a more detailed view of the recruitment processes for a more detailed description of the results and an explanation of the methodology see the report of the national rapporteur covering the period pp. and . inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers qualitative data are required on aspects that are part of this modus oper andi. by way of illustration an analysis of investigations has shown that in most cases . per cent at least one of the trafficked persons was acquainted with the recruiter as friends or partners or as acquaintances in prostitution areas in cases involving sexual exploitation via social networking sites or cafes or bars p. for further information on this issue see shelley p. staring p. and verhoeven and van gestel . it is likely that friends family members or acquaintances are able to gain more trust than strangers from potential victims. as pointed out by several authors trust is an important factor in the modus operandi of traffickers in the recruit ment phase p. p. p. . by extension it might be extremely challenging though not less important to break through such trust patterns. third preventive measures should focus not only on potential victims but also on recruiters. for instance one finding of the analysis of investiga tions is that the roles suspects play seem to be statistically related with certain characteristics of suspects. as such recruiters have a criminal background more often than other suspects. to what extent was this criminal background known to the police and to what degree was it related to human trafficking practices and were opportunities missed that might have prevented this fur ther career in crime in general information on the type of roles that suspects play in human trafficking processes provide insight into which suspects can be signalled by whom and in what places. suspects often . per cent n play a variety of roles in the human trafficking process such as pimps border crossing transporters guards drivers within the country and suspects providing trafficked persons with the necessary documents pp. . statistics to expose bottlenecks human trafficking statistics have the potential to expose bottlenecks in the efforts to combat human trafficking. on this basis suggestions can be made to initiate more efficient policy see national rapporteur s report covering the period pp. . for instance statistics may con tribute to the development of more rational criminal justice policy and pro vide a means of assuring equal enforcement of the laws p. . building on statistical and legal case law analysis the national rapporteur revealed several bottlenecks in sentencing and ruling human trafficking cases in the netherlands. a qualitative and partially quantitative analysis of all judge ments rendered in the period from october to august was con ducted in order to answer questions such as how is the provision of the inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume criminal code pertaining to human trafficking applied what problems have emerged in relation to its application how is human trafficking pun ished what reasons are given for the sentences imposed and how are claims by aggrieved parties dealt with in the criminal process . the bottom line is that in the netherlands the provision of the criminal code pertaining to human trafficking is a complex provision to apply in practice. in spite of this judges were generally inexperienced in human trafficking cases a fact that becomes visible in some rudimentary figures. for example more than three quarters of the judges concerned in had dealt with only a single human trafficking investigation in that year pp. and . the statistical and legal case law study has led the national consulta tive body for presidents of criminal courts to adopt a number of measures relating to the specialization and training of judges hearing human trafficking cases p. . the quantitative analysis relates to judgements in human trafficking cases in the first instance in n . this has demonstrated among other things that the number of acquittals in human trafficking cases has been consistently high. out of indictments the charges led to convictions for human traf ficking in . per cent of the cases. the percentage of acquittals has been higher in cases involving exploitation outside the sex industry . per cent n than in cases involving sexual exploitation . per cent n . factors that explain the higher percentage of acquittals in cases involving exploitation outside the sex industry may relate to the relatively recent crimi nalization of the offence in the netherlands the need to flesh out the defini tion of the offence in case law or a knowledge gap in general if it comes to this form of exploitation. in addition the statistical and case law analysis has shown major disparities with regard to sentencing in more or less similar human trafficking cases and that does not reflect a clear framework of assessment . the findings of the national rapporteur s statistical and case law analysis have resulted in a recommendation to develop orientation points for the courts in the interest of sentencing pp. and . in this regard it is relevant to look at the situation in other countries. in the united states for instance the guidelines manual containing federal guidelines that should contribute to appropriate and more two cases were related to both sexual and other forms of exploitation. these cases are only included once in the totals p. . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry was criminalized with effect from january . all forms of sexual exploitation have been a criminal offence since october pp. . for particular offences other than human trafficking orientation points for the judiciary already exist . in addition the public prosecution service has developed instructions on human trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation which took effect on september and in the sense of servitude and labour exploitation which entered into force on may pp. and . inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers consistent sentencing in federal crime cases has been developed by the sen tencing commission which itself consists largely of judges . the terms human trafficking offense and forced labor are briefly referred to in the federal guidelines which discuss more extensively the sexual exploitation of a minor . in addition some elements of the concept of human traf ficking such as the abuse of a position of vulnerability are included in the guidelines manual p. . there is evidence that guidelines that have been informed by data together with legislative directives concerning relevant factors for sentencing might result in a much more coherent overall sentencing policy p. . likewise the guidelines manual provides guidance for uniform and appropriate sentencing decisions in human traf ficking cases. statistics as a starting point for looking further as a final point statistics regularly lead to questions for which the answers need to be taken into account in the design of policy and implementation see for example national rapporteur s report covering the period pp. . one particular question to which statistics can lead concerns the aspects of human trafficking that are still underexposed and other aspects that may be overrepresented. without data we cannot deter mine the causes of overrepresentation so we cannot develop effective solu tions p. . this can be further elucidated by two examples. to begin with statistics that indicate the number of seen and registered trafficked per sons suspects or human trafficking situations in the netherlands demon strate that exploitation outside the sex industry seems to be underexposed. by way of illustration according to the registrations of the coordination centre for human trafficking comensha of registered presumed trafficked persons in . per cent had supposedly been sexually exploited . per cent had supposedly been exploited outside the sex industry mostly in the agricultural and horticultural sectors . per cent had not yet worked generally the youngest and for . per cent the area of exploitation was unknown or not registered. the number of presumed trafficked persons reg istered at comensha depends on which organizations report them and whether they are required to do so. the police and the royal netherlands marechaussee are obliged to report trafficked persons and accordingly account for most notifications pp. and . note that the registrations of comensha include presumed trafficked persons who are reg istered at even the slightest indication of human trafficking. subsequently it is most likely that those registrations include false positives though it is not presumed trafficked persons are registered at comensha for the purposes of the national rapporteur s reporting p. p. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume known to what extent. the number of sexually exploited presumed trafficked persons versus those who are exploited outside the sex industry most proba bly reflects the efforts to tackle human trafficking. in this regard it is conceiv able that a dominant focus on sexual exploitation in addressing human trafficking results in less attention being paid to exploitation outside the sex industry. in this regard o brien writes that data on trafficking can become skewed due to both politicized data collection and a primary focus on traf ficking for sexual exploitation instead of all forms of forced labor. while the limitations of sampling typically suffer from an underreporting of the crime of trafficking the skewing of data can result in the overreporting of certain types of trafficking often resulting in the mischaracterization of the nature of trafficking pp. and see also national rapporteur s report covering the period pp. and goodey weitzer lvarez and alessi and chuang . the opposite an overreporting of exploitation outside the sex industry is equally possible. this might be reflected by some international statistics. by way of illustration in belgium labour exploitation has been registered more than sexual exploita tion pp. . the following is another example of the importance of statistics in indicating what aspects of human trafficking are underexposed. in the netherlands the police deal with a substantial number of complaints in which there seem to be insufficient investigative leads. consequently such cases are almost immedi ately dismissed obviously not leading to the arrest of an offender. according to the national rapporteur there were about such complaints in . it is worth noting that they seemed mostly to involve presumed trafficked persons from african countries. the registrations of comensha show for the year that the largest group of registered presumed trafficked persons were citizens of the netherlands closely followed by citizens of countries in central and eastern europe. another significant group accounting for . per cent were citizens of african countries mainly nigeria. by contrast suspects from african countries appear relatively infrequently in statistics of the public prosecution service of the suspects in only a small per centage . per cent came from african countries morocco being an excep tion pp. and . this finding is notable in view of the fact that several authors have pointed out that trafficked persons and offenders often come from the same region p. p. . most remarkable is the finding that from onwards fewer citizens of african countries seem to have been identified and registered pp. . this group did not include the inhabitants of north africa algeria egypt libya morocco the sudan tunis and western sahara p. . inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers however it is unknown whether there are actually fewer citizens of african countries trafficked in the netherlands. it is equally possible that they are concealing themselves more than before or that less attention is being devoted to identifying and reporting them. perhaps the declined number correlates with the demotivation for investigating human trafficking situations involving trafficked citizens of african countries because there generally seem to be insufficient investigative leads in such cases. their complaints would impose a strain on the resources of the police and the public prosecution service because the complaints would have to be processed and what few leads there are must be investigated p. . relatively little is known about human trafficking situations in the nether lands involving trafficked persons from african countries. the national rap porteur has stressed in several of her reports that the absence of sufficient investigative leads does not necessarily preclude the possibility of human traf ficking pp. and p. p. . the remark able statistics have led to the conclusion that more quantitative and in depth qualitative research is needed in order to discern trends and links in human trafficking stories p. . examples of such research can be found in other countries for example in belgium where an anthropological research has been conducted into judicial files among which files are nigerian and are moroccan. this explorative research provides valuable insight into african human trafficking networks that operate internationally also in the netherlands and in terms of their modus operandi differ from eastern european human trafficking networks . conclusions statistics are important for reinforcing viewpoints and may form the basis for sound decisions in the enactment and implementation of policies. however positions are sometimes taken on the basis of unverifiable unreliable or inac curate data . scale statistics are often sought in order to demonstrate the supposedly alarming scale of human trafficking or in support of a particular policy on prostitution. in recent years various studies have attempted to esti mate the total scale of human trafficking however at the moment reliable and accurate estimates are absent. the existing estimates seem to take on a life of their own p. in politics in academic literature and in the media. in such cases statistics do the opposite of what is intended to provide reliable information. the authors of this article have suggested a shift in perspective from scale statistics towards statistics on the nature of human trafficking at a lower level inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume of aggregation see also weitzer p. and zhang and others in the absence of reliable estimates on the total scale of human trafficking. sta tistics often reflect the human trafficking that is visible and the measures that are taken to combat human trafficking. there are three ways in which statis tics can be of the utmost importance in the fight against human trafficking first to guide the measures taken to combat human trafficking evidence based policy second to expose bottlenecks that may be used as a basis for suggestions to initiate more efficient policy and implementation and third to be used as a starting point for further research providing answers to questions such as why certain aspects still seem to be underexposed in the fight against human trafficking. in conclusion the authors of this article encourage the collection and analysis of quantitative data in microlevel settings see also weitzer . by doing so efforts to tackle human trafficking can be adapted to particular contexts and policymaking can be done in a more appropriate manner. furthermore academics are encouraged not to rely on current esti mates or to reproduce them but to initiate data collection and analysis within the framework of the relevance of statistics such as has been presented in this article. references . national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children trafficking in human beings visible and invisible a quantitative report the hague bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . . national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children mensenhandel in en uit beeld ii. cijfermatige rapportage the hague bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . . national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children does legalised prostitution generate more human trafficking the hague national rapporteur . . national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children trafficking in human beings case law on trafficking in human beings an analysis the hague bureau national rapporteur mensenhandel . . international labour organization ilo global estimate of forced labour results and methodology geneva international labour office . . hard to see harder to count survey guidelines to estimate forced labour of adults and children geneva international labour office . inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers . walk free foundation global slavery index . available at www. globalslaveryindex.org. . ronald weitzer sex trafficking and the sex industry the need for evidence based theory and legislation journal of criminal law and criminology vol. no. pp. . . national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children mensenhandel negende rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur the hague bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . . moral noshad sharifi miljoen mensen leven in slavernij march . available at www.nrc.nl next van maart miljoen mensen leven in slavernij . . laura l. shoaps room for improvement palermo protocol and the trafficking victims protection act lewis and clark law review vol. no. pp. . . monti n. datta and k. bales slavery in europe part estimating the dark figure human rights quarterly vol. no. november pp. . . marieke bottenberg and others seksuele uitbuiting criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse woerden korps landelijk politiediensten dienst nationale recherche . . fairwork verborgen slavernij in nederland amsterdam . . fabrizio sarrica measuring trafficking in persons in forum on crime and society united nations publication sales no. e. .iv. pp. . . micha lla de cock directions for national and international data collection on forced labour working paper no. geneva international labour office . . mike dottridge deserving trust issues of accountability for human right ngos draft report for consultation geneva international council on human rights policy . . amy farrell and others review of existing estimates of victims of human trafficking in the united states and recommendations for improving research and measurement of human trafficking washington d.c. humanity united . . jo goodey human trafficking sketchy data and policy responses criminology and criminal justice vol. no. pp. . . amanda j. gould from pseudoscience to protoscience estimating human trafficking and modern forms of slavery paper submitted to the second annual interdisciplinary conference on human trafficking october . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume . erin o brien dark numbers challenges in measuring human trafficking dialogue e journal vol. no. . . gury tyldum limitations in research on human trafficking international migration vol. no. october pp. . . ronald weitzer new directions in research on human trafficking the annals of the american academy of political social science vol. no. may pp. . . sheldon x. zhang and others estimating labor trafficking among unauthor ized migrant workers in san diego the annals of the american academy of political and social science vol. no. may pp. . . g. tyldum and a. brunovskis describing the unobserved methodological challenges in empirical studies on human trafficking international migration vol. nos. january pp. . . frank bovenkerk and willemien hogewind de levende statistiek van de moorddadige dood in discretie in het strafrecht m. boone and others eds. the hague boom juridische uitgevers pp. . . terry l. penney dark figure of crime problems of estimation in the encyclopedia of criminology and criminal justice jay. s. albanese ed. chichester west sussex wiley blackwell . . john tierney criminology theory and context rd ed. new york routledge . . united nations treaty series vol. no. . . frank laczko and marco a. gramegna developing better indicators of human trafficking brown journal of world affairs vol. x no. summer fall pp. . . unodc abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons issue paper vienna . . michael jandl research on trafficking in persons gaps and limitations in crime and criminal justice data in forum on crime and society vol. united nations publication sales no. e. .iv. pp. . . beate andrees why definitions matter february . available at www.ilo.org . . marcelo f. aebi and others european sourcebook of crime and criminal justice statistics th ed. the hague boom juridische uitgevers . inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers . marcelo f. aebi methodological issues in the comparison of police recorded crime rates in international handbook of criminology shlomo g. shoham paul knepper and martin kett eds. boca raton florida crc press pp. . . richard r. bennett and james p. lynch j does a difference make a difference comparing cross national crime indicators criminology vol. no. pp. . . david p. farrington patrick a. langan and michael h. tonry cross national studies in crime and justice washington d.c. united states department of justice office of justice programs bureau of justice statistics . . gregory howard and tony smith understanding cross national variations of crime rates in europe and north america in crime and criminal justice in europe and north america report on the sixth united nations survey on crime trends and criminal justice systems kauko aromaa and others eds. heuni publication series no. helsinki european institute for crime prevention and control affiliated with the united nations pp. . . rodrigo r. soares development crime and punishment accounting for the international differences in crime rates journal of development economics vol. no. pp. . . laura m. agust n sex at the margins migration labour markets and the rescue industry london zed books . . jo doezema forced to choose beyond the voluntary v. forced prostitution dichotomy in global sex workers. rights resistance and redefinition kamal kempadoo and jo doezema eds. new york routledge pp. . . ratna kapur the tragedy of victimization rhetoric resurrecting the native subject in international post colonial feminist legal politics harvard human rights journal vol. pp. . . julia o connell davidson will the real sex slave please stand up feminist review vol. pp. . . julia o connell davidson new slavery old binaries human trafficking and the borders of freedom global networks vol. no. april pp. . . brenda c. oude breuil precious children in a heartless world the complexi ties of child trafficking in marseille children and society vol. no. may pp. . . jayashri srikantiah perfect victims and real survivors the iconic victim in domestic human trafficking law boston university law review vol. no. february pp. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume . seo young cho axel dreher and eric neumayer does legalised prostitution increase human trafficking world development vol. no. january pp. . . andrea di nicola and others study on national legislation on prostitution and the trafficking in women and children brussels european parliament . . niklas jakobsson and andreas kotsadam the law and economics of inter national sex slavery prostitution laws and trafficking for sexual exploitation european journal of law and economics vol. no. february pp. . . janice g. raymond ten reasons for not legalizing prostitution and a legal response to the demand for prostitution journal of trauma practice vol. nos. and pp. . . patrick belser micha lle de cock and farhad mehran ilo minimum esti mate of forced labour in the world geneva international labour office . . united nations office on drugs and crime trafficking in persons global patterns vienna . . gergana danailova trainor and patrick belser globalization and the illicit market for human trafficking an empirical analysis of supply and demand working paper no. geneva international labour office . . thomas m. steinfatt and simon baker measuring the extent of sex trafficking in cambodia bangkok united nations inter agency project on human trafficking . . thomas m. steinfatt measuring the number of trafficked women and children in cambodia a direct observation field study part iii of a series october . . denise brennan methodological challenges in research with trafficked persons tales from the field international migration vol. nos. and pp. . . european commission communication from the commission to the european parliament the council the european economic and social committee and the committee of the regions delivering an area of freedom security and justice for europe s citizens action plan implementing the stockholm programme com may . available at http europa.eu . . european commission communication from the commission to the european parliament the council the european economic and social committee and the committee of the regions the eu strategy towards the eradication of traf ficking in human beings com june . available at available at http europa.eu . inner e ck hk.indd extremely wanted human trafficking statistics what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers . directive eu of the european parliament and of the council of april on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims and replacing council framework decision jha official journal of the european union no. l april . available at http eur lex.europa.eu . . erica j. hashimoto class matters journal of criminal law and criminology vol. no. pp. . . rianne verwijs and others loverboys en hun slachtoffers inzicht in aard en omvang problematiek en in het aanbod aan hulpverlening en opvang utrecht verwey jonker instituut . . alexis a. aronowitz human trafficking human misery the global trade in human beings global crime and justice series westport connecticut praeger . . mark latonero and others human trafficking online the role of social networking sites and online classifieds research series university of southern california september . . mark latonero and others the rise of mobile and the diffusion of technology facilitated trafficking research series on technology and human trafficking university of southern california november . . t. mitali and d. boyd networked trafficking reflections on technology and the anti trafficking movement dialectical anthropology vol. no. pp. . . danah boyd and others human trafficking and technology a framework for understanding the role of technology in the commercial exploitation of children in the u.s. microsoft research . . david ingram fbi arrests in three days in sex trafficking sweep july . available at www.reuters.com article us usa crime prostitution idusbre s nc . . louise shelley human trafficking a global perspective new york cambridge university press . . richard h.j.m. staring human trafficking in the netherlands trends and recent developments international review of law computers and technology vol. no. pp. . . m. verhoeven and b. van gestel relaties tussen verdachten en slachtoffers en de opsporing van mensenhandel cahiers politiestudies vol. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume . rebecca surtees traffickers and trafficking in southern and eastern europe considering the other side of human trafficking european journal of criminology vol. no. pp. . . de rechtspraak ori ntatiepunten voor straftoemeting en lovs afspraken bijgewerkt november . . united states sentencing commission guidelines manual washington d.c. november . . william r. maynard human trafficking under the sentencing guidelines federal sentencing reporter vol. no. pp. . . kathleen a. mckee it s p.m. do you know where your children are regent university law review vol. no. pp. . . maria b. lvarez and edward j. alessi human trafficking is more than sex traf ficking and prostitution implications for social work affilia vol. no. may pp. . . janie a. chuang rescuing trafficking from ideological capture prostitution reform and anti trafficking law and policy university of pennsylvania law review vol. no. may pp. . . eurostat trafficking in human beings methodologies and working papers luxembourg publications office of the european union . . global report on trafficking in persons united nations publications sales no. e. .iv. . . national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings trafficking in human beings seventh report of the dutch national rapporteur the hague bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . . j. leman and s. janssens creative adaptive criminal entrepreneurs from africa and human trafficking in belgium case studies of traffickers from nigeria and morocco international journal of criminology and sociology vol. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement by sheldon x. zhang and li cai abstract research on human trafficking faces many challenges one of which is the lack of consistent measurement. although there have been efforts throughout the world to collect primary data researchers have not come close to finding a common set of measures that can be applied consistently in counting traffick ing activities or victimization experiences. the development of a common data collection instrument especially one that is appealing to researchers in different countries is no easy task. the authors present one such example in this article for all to comment on and improve. this instrument created a few years ago in an empirical study on labour trafficking in the united states of america is intended for use in large scale surveys by persons engaged in research or gathering data for estimating prevalence. the instrument has received excellent empirical validation including item response analysis and has been adopted in a few other studies. while the instrument is still in need of improvement the authors would like to publicize their efforts so that oth ers may draw lessons from and build upon what has been accomplished. although individual circumstances may vary human trafficking shares suffi cient commonalities to allow standardized measurement. a common instru ment is a crucial step towards meaningful international or cross regional comparison which is sorely missing in the current policy discourse on human trafficking. keywords labour exploitation labour trafficking migration migrant worker respondent driven sampling trafficking in persons united states of america background by all accounts from either government agencies or international organiza tions human trafficking is a serious global problem. international organiza tions and the government of the united states of america claim that tens of san diego state university california united states of america. university of california los angeles united states. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume millions of people are trafficked throughout the world for purposes of sexual exploitation and labour exploitation . bales p. estimated million slaves worldwide the majority of whom were bonded labourers in bangladesh india nepal and pakistan. in the international labour organization ilo estimated that there were at least . million people in forced labour worldwide . about . million of these are forced to work by the state the army or rebel military groups. the remaining . million are exploited by private agents and enterprises. of these only about . million or per cent are in commercial sexual exploitation while most . million are in forced labour exploitation. in a more recent study ilo updated its estimates of global trafficking victimization based on an analysis of published reports and accounts of iden tified victims. ilo used two teams of researchers to conduct separate coding schemes to verify all reported cases. using the capture recapture method ilo put the total number of forced labourers at . million . million per cent of whom were exploited by individual employers or private enterprises . more specifically among these estimated victims . million per cent of the total were victims of forced sexual exploitation and . million per cent were victims of forced labour in economic activi ties such as agriculture construction domestic work and manufacturing. despite these grim estimates labour trafficking has not gained much trac tion compared with sex trafficking among either the research or advocacy communities. sex trafficking has remained front and centre ever since the beginning of the larger anti trafficking movement . in an exhaustive review of existing literature farrell and others identified sources that provided a count or some estimates of human trafficking. the vast majority of those counts referred to sex trafficking or the sexual exploitation of children. only sources provided information from which a count or estimate of labour trafficking could be inferred p. . in their review of nine reports from service organizations logan walker and hunt found the same scarcity of empirical data on human trafficking in general and labour trafficking in particular. in fact there is so much attention focused on sex trafficking that some researchers have come to believe that the most common form of human trafficking involves sexual exploitation . even the united states government has claimed for years that the majority of transnational victims are women and children trafficked into commercial sexual exploitation . in a comprehensive review of literature gozdziak and bump p. lamented that current research had focused on sex traf ficking almost to the detriment of investigating trafficking for bonded labor and domestic servitude . inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement for many years a growing number of researchers have become concerned about the heavy focus on sex trafficking and have advocated a shift in research and policy discourse . for instance belser points out that the major ity of human economic activities forced or otherwise are not concerned with sex. the united nations office on drugs and crime unodc also acknow ledges the uneven coverage and believes that the greater problem of forced labour and domestic servitude has been largely ignored. in a unodc sur vey trafficking activities were identified in countries and per cent of the victims had been subjected to sexual exploitation. unodc believes that the underdetection of labour trafficking was universal across regions and even countries p. . the limited knowledge about labour trafficking has long caught the attention of international organizations including unodc the international labour organization ilo and the international organization for migration . the united states department of justice p. in its assessment of u.s. government efforts to combat trafficking in persons in fiscal year called for enhanced efforts to monitor and com bat labor trafficking both domestically and internationally especially in light of the new mandate in the tvpra trafficking victims protection reauthorization act concerning forced labor and child labor . the existing literature on human trafficking in addition to overemphasizing sex trafficking suffers from an acute case of empirical anaemia lack of primary data collection based on sound sampling procedures. for instance after reviewing publications of various types farrell and others found that nearly all the counts or estimates of human trafficking were based on trafficking cases identified in published documents mainly in united states and international news reports and over per cent of the identified sources failed to indicate the sources that led to their estimates. the poor quality and documentation of procedures used to arrive at any estimates cre ate enormous uncertainty about the scope of the problem and leave any such estimates open to challenge p. vi . in a recent ilo publication reference was made to the methodological inadequacies of the annual report providing global estimates of trafficking victims particularly in dealing with missing values and quality problems in the original data p. . the problem of estimating the scope and nature of labour trafficking has been recognized by international organizations and the united states gov ernment. one common feature in current trafficking literature is its heavy reliance on prosecuted cases or secondary sources rather than on primary data collection which underscores the difficulties and challenges inherent in this type of empirical research. the challenges of producing estimates of the scale of human trafficking are well understood . as a result ilo called for high priority to be given to the development of field and inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume statistical techniques to support actions against forced labour and human trafficking. in the global report under the follow up to the ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work p. it is stated that the absence of reliable forced labour statistics at the national level prevents the establishment of benchmarks by which progress can be measured over time . unodc has also called for the establishment of a continuing international mechanism to gather data on the true size of the trafficking market and to monitor trends and patterns of trafficking in persons . the international organization for migration has also called for improved data collection and data based analysis as the basis for guiding public policy . the united states government accountability office after issuing a critical report ques tioning the methodologies used in the report of the department of state on trafficking in persons called for the development of reliable and empirically based indicators to better identify human trafficking activities. challenges in trafficking research the need for and challenges in producing estimates on the scale of human trafficking have been widely discussed . among the multitude of conceptual and methodological challenges in human trafficking research two stand out a definitional problems and b representative sampling. in other words what are to be counted as trafficking violations instead of just abusive or exploitative labour practices and where are the vic tims to be found in this article the authors have presented an example of how to define and operationalize labour trafficking and have constructed an instrument to standardize the measurement. the messy business of defining labour trafficking there remains much ambiguity and uncertainty as to what constitutes labour trafficking or human trafficking in general. farrell and others found that most law enforcement agencies do not even recognize the existence of labour trafficking. definitional ambiguity impedes efforts in operationalizing meas ures that are needed in data collection. there has been a lack of concerted efforts in translating established legal frameworks into workable measures or survey instruments to assist empirical research. there are currently no stand ardized or even widely accepted survey instruments within the united states that can be used for data gathering purposes. the absence of a common definition has long plagued the development of empirical measures on human trafficking. some countries and their legal sys tems do not even recognize the existence of labour trafficking p. . inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement without a common conceptual and legal framework international collabora tion is difficult. the lack of shared definitions also prevents the gathering of data that can be used in comparative studies thus further hampering policy development. many countries mix trafficking smuggling and irregular migra tion in their official data collection efforts . for instance as late as the confusion between smuggling and trafficking and the misuse of the two terms caused the united states immigration and customs enforcement the lead federal agency on immigration control to mislabel many cases thus erroneously inflating the total number of trafficking investigations and arrests p. . the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons espe cially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organized crime opened for signature in palermo italy in december helped clarify the issue by introducing two essential elements to the definition of human trafficking the use of either force or fraud in extracting labour to achieve monetary gains . however the pro tocol did not end the debate on the definition because human trafficking in practice often involves multiple stages and individuals from recruitment to transportation and from harbouring to employment . the diverse situa tions in which players of varied interests enter and exit the process of traffick ing make it difficult to tell when smuggling ends and trafficking begins or when voluntary participation becomes coerced or deceived. to complicate the matter further different countries have also developed their own operational definitions. for instance in the united states legal definitions of sex trafficking and labour trafficking are provided in section paragraph of the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of in which the term severe forms of trafficking in persons is defined as follows a sex trafficking in which a commercial sex act is induced by force fraud or coercion or in which the person induced to perform such act has not attained years of age or b the recruitment harboring transportation provision or obtaining of a person for labor or services through the use of force fraud or coercion for the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude peonage debt bondage or slavery. ilo has for years applied its own definition to highlight the labour perspec tive. the genesis of the ilo definition can be traced back to its forced labour convention no. in which forced or compulsory labour was inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume defined as all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily . two key elements in this definition are involuntariness and the penalty or menace of a penalty. ilo also drew a link between forced labour and human trafficking arguing that the definition of trafficking in persons in article of the trafficking in persons protocol complements the ilo definition. however ilo p. acknowledged the various inter pretations of the trafficking in persons protocol that had been developed by governments international organizations and other stakeholders in their laws policies and practices. although ilo sees few differences between the two legal frameworks its efforts in operationalizing data collection instruments recognize the slippery elements of movement across national borders and the involvement of a third party as implied in the terminology trafficking p. . while the inclu sion of such elements may assist law enforcement agencies in separating traf ficked from non trafficked victims leading to different policy responses ilo has decided not to adopt a position on this issue. furthermore ilo has clarified that forced labour can happen to all workers irrespective of the employment relationship. in other words people on contracted jobs or self employed vendors can also be subjected to forced labour because recruiters and employers increasingly oblige workers to adopt the legal status of self employed thus disguising the underlying employment relationship p. . in general ilo offers a more precise albeit narrower definition of what con stitutes labour trafficking than the trafficking in persons protocol. the ilo definition places greater emphasis on the victims subjective assessment of their circumstances as opposed to the judgement of third parties such as researchers or advocacy groups. in its most recent technical guideline to assist the global estimation of forced labour ilo once again sought to clarify the legal and operational definitions of forced labour and cautioned that national laws often differ from the international definitions p. . in practice many researchers apply a range of definitions to their data some do not explicitly distinguish between labour and sex trafficking while others include additional provisions or language . researchers such as bales and kara see few differences in these terms or they see no need to dif ferentiate them and opt instead to highlight the theme that they all share the control of one person over another and the complete power of the employer to determine working conditions remuneration and contract terms. in fact kara p. is against replacing slavery with forced labour and slave trade with human trafficking because the terms weaken the moral intensity required to mount effective campaigns against those crimes. inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement current state of labour trafficking measurement the lack of clarity in the definition of labour trafficking also hampers the development of measurement for empirical studies although there have been independent efforts to construct so called trafficking indictors. there remains a major gap between what is known conceptually and what specific questions must be asked in a survey to gather information on labour trafficking victimi zation. both ilo and the international organization for migration have in various publications claimed to be conducting studies on labour trafficking in different parts of the world. thus far they have not published any specific survey instruments so others may learn and adopt. however several of their publications have listed specific categories or items that suggest the domains of information to be considered and how such instruments should be con structed. for example the handbook on anti trafficking data collection in south eastern europe developed by the international centre for migration policy development provides guidelines for constructing victim centred or trafficker centred databases the handbook suggests that forms of traffick ing include sexual exploitation forced labour begging delinquency adop tion removal of organs and proper values such as sexual physical psychological for entries in the databases pp. and . the most elaborate attempt to operationalize indicators of human trafficking has been made by ilo . using the delphi method essentially a consen sus building exercise among selected experts ilo conducted two surveys in to establish a list of operational indicators of trafficking victimization. the delphi panellists were selected from police government academic and research entities non governmental organizations international organiza tions labour and trade organizations and judiciaries in european union member states. specific indicators were developed along six dimensions graded as strong medium or weak a deceptive recruitment b coer cive recruitment c recruitment by abuse of vulnerability d exploitative conditions of work e coercion at destination and f abuse of vulnerability at destination. ilo also determined that to qualify as a trafficking victim a combination of the experiences or levels of intensity i.e. strong medium or weak is needed an exercise similar to the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders used by mental health professionals in the united states to render a clinical diagnosis. such an elaborate screening and intake process requires well trained staff and ample time something most survey research ers cannot afford. an updated technical manuscript on measuring labour trafficking was issued by ilo in . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume san diego labour trafficking instrument between and a labour trafficking study funded by the united states department of justice was carried out by a research team in san diego california. the main goal of the study was to apply the respondent driven sampling method to estimate the prevalence of labour trafficking among undocumented migrant labourers in san diego county . an instrument had to be developed for screening purposes. at the time of the study no instruments were available in any open source so the research team had to develop its own based on a review of existing literature interpretation of different legal frameworks and a series of focus groups. instrument development an immediate challenge that confronted the san diego research team in the construction of the measurement instrument was whether to conceptualize human trafficking as an incident or a state of existence. by convention crime has mostly been studied on an incident basis. for instance every crime whether it is a burglary or a robbery is counted as an incident where a single occurrence will suffice for definitional purposes. it is not so simple when it comes to defining human trafficking especially labour trafficking in which victimization is often presumed to have lasted for some time. while the crimi nal justice system in the united states is now charged with the primary responsibility of fighting human trafficking the conceptualization and clarifi cation of the nature of this crime are not well developed. another challenge in the san diego study was the requirement of an instrument to be applied to a large sample so that quantitative data could be captured in consistency for the purpose of estimating the prevalence of the trafficking problem. it is beyond the scope of this article to sort out the conceptual nuances on whether human trafficking as a crime should be incident based i.e. a particu lar event or state based i.e. a type of existence however it should be noted that the san diego team was fully aware of the many challenges at the time that it developed its instrument. in its effort to reconcile this conceptual dilemma the san diego team opted for a structure that would capture both. as a result the basic format of the san diego labour trafficking instrument is modelled on the questionnaire format used in the international self report delinquency study a format first developed by criminologists from coun tries in the late s . because that format has gone through numer ous field applications for more than two decades and become a widely adopted standardized instrument for measuring delinquent and criminal behaviour this study borrowed its basic structure which is designed to measure both the inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement prevalence i.e. the extent of the problem and the incidence i.e. the fre quency of victimization of trafficking activities. measurement domains the survey questionnaire was intended to capture different trafficking viola tions those that qualify under both international and united states govern ment definitions of human trafficking as well as abusive or exploitative labour practices. the san diego labour trafficking instrument contains both structured and open ended items. structured questions aim at capturing common elements for statistical analysis such as demographics trafficking and exploitation experiences and the respondent s financial situation. open ended questions are intended to capture unique incidents of victimization. the instrument covers the following domains of information demographical characteristics age marital status number of chil dren if any education place of birth family members in the home country and the united states length of time in san diego and the united states work and earnings measured for the past month followed by more general history over the past months and prior to and after arrival in the united states the amount of money made in those periods the amount saved and or the amount remitted to the home country employment activities in san diego emphasis placed on interactions with employers wage negotiations and payment methods various measures of trafficking victimization and labour exploitation including not being paid for work performed receiving bad checks being underpaid being abandoned at work hazardous work condi tions extended hours without compensation no breaks verbal and or physical abuse or threats of abuse confiscation of documents and restriction of freedom of movement migration decision the circumstances under which the subject came to know his or her recruiter and trafficker the characteristics of the recruiter terms and conditions between the subject and the recruiter and the types of arrangements for embarking on the journey although it is assumed that most subjects wanted to come to the united states it is unclear whether at the time of making the decision to migrate they had any idea of the abuse and exploitation that they might have to face when crossing the border. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume transportation stage description of the trip including way stations stopovers or layovers length of time and conditions of travel trafficking violations and abusive practices because of the overlapping nature of trafficking violations and labour exploi tation the san diego team took the approach of constructing a wide range of items to capture different levels of human rights violations and unfair treat ment of undocumented migrants. furthermore because the target popula tion was undocumented migrant labourers consideration was given as to whether the violations or abuses took place a during illegal migration or b at the workplace in the united states. two broad though sometimes overlapping categories of measures were constructed in the survey instrument trafficking violations and abusive practices. to reduce possible definitional confusion and for the sake of con ceptual clarity a conservative or narrow interpretation of what constitutes trafficking was adopted in this study. to qualify for trafficking violations the nature of the victimization must include actual or threatened infringe ment of freedom of movement e.g. holding a migrant hostage in order to extort ransom during transportation or actual or threatened violation of the person s physical integrity e.g. physical or sexual assault . everything else was grouped under the category of abusive practices. most of these measures are in line with the united states government s interpretation of what con stitutes labour trafficking since they are taken directly from the two pam phlets issued by the federal agencies primarily responsible for current anti trafficking programmes. two items items and were specifically designed to capture the traf ficking nature of any violations that happened during the transportation phase see table . another items items through were designed to capture trafficking violations at the workplace. measures of abusive practices are those practices which are grossly unfair or exploitative in nature but are not necessarily serious enough to rise up to the level of trafficking. these practices can be perpetrated by either a smuggler during transportation or an employer at a workplace they include practices such as forbidding someone from leaving the travelling group during trans portation or working in a hazardous environment without protective gear. although somewhat subjective the abusive practices measured in this study also included practices that were clearly fraudulent and deceptive definitional elements present in all international and united states legal frameworks. the inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement authors opted to exclude fraudulent and deceptive practices from the cate gory of trafficking violations because they wanted to obtain a set of clean measures by focusing on force and coercion . examples of such fraudu lent practices include promising to pay migrants for a certain job and then abandoning them at the workplace after the work was completed or instruct ing them to lie about their employer s identity or their own identity at the workplace. the items on abusive practices during transportation are items and and the items on abusive practices at the workplace are items . although far from perfect these measures represent the first attempt in the united states research community to produce a standard instrument for pri mary data collection in labour trafficking research. for future data collection or analysis researchers may consider different ways to configure these catego ries of measures and decide how to count different violations. for instance an even stricter or narrower definition may be adopted to count only direct and actual violations of physical integrity or freedom of movement or a wider definition may be used to include elements of fraud and deception. many more studies are needed to replicate and improve these measures so that uni form data and comparable estimates can be produced to guide policymaking and resource allocation in anti trafficking campaigns. it should be noted that because the data gathering procedure was self report i.e. face to face interview in this study the authors relied on the subjective evaluation of the participants own experiences. because of con cerns for human subject protection the authors made no attempt to verify the participants stories among their peers and relatives or to interview their employers or smugglers. furthermore a single incident of violation or abuse would qualify for victimization. the authors used this counting method because in no other research on crime is repeated exposure required to define victimization. vetting pilot testing and instrument refinement the questionnaire used in the san diego labour trafficking study underwent a rigorous vetting process in its development phase. during its initial develop ment the instrument was reviewed by the main legal office at the united states department of justice which provided comments and suggested a closer alignment with the trafficking legislation in the united states and the operational indicators contained in the public announcement pamphlets issued by the federal agencies. two federal agencies the department of state and the department of health and human services publish pamphlets inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume containing operational indicators on human trafficking. these pamphlets are intended to raise awareness among immigrants and foreign nationals of their basic human rights and forewarn them on various rights violation situations. based on the pamphlets and comments of the legal office of the united states department of justice the research team revised and expanded the question naire to include measures of scholarly interests as well as practitioner relevant indicators contained in the government documents. the revised version was again submitted to the united states department of justice for review. no further suggestions were made. following the face validity phase the questionnaire went through two addi tional stages of refinement. first after the questionnaire was translated into spanish the project s community partner agency the san diego center for social advocacy reviewed the questionnaire and compared it with the eng lish version to detect any deviations in the intended meanings. the spanish translation was adapted for use with mexican migrants which included cul turally and linguistically sensitive probes for the respondents idiomatic expressions of labour and travel experiences. the spanish version was also back translated into english to ensure fidelity. an item by item review of the translation was made by the bilingual project staff paying special attention to cultural and linguistic adaptations appropriate for the subject population. following the translation mock interviews were conducted in spanish to test the length and flow of the questions. adjustments and rewording were made based on those efforts. second two focus groups were conducted with six unauthorized migrant labourers recruited from the project area using the instrument. the focus groups were immediately followed by a debriefing in which the migrant labourers were asked to comment on the structure flow and wording of the questions. further refinements were made before the instrument was put to use in the field. empirical test of the instrument using this instrument a total of subjects were interviewed. it was found that per cent of the undocumented migrant labourer were victims of labour trafficking per cent were victims of other labour abuses and about half of the state department pamphlet can be found at http www.travel.state.gov pdf pamphlet order.pdf and the brochure from department of health and human services is available at www.acf.hhs.gov trafficking campaign kits tool kit social social service brochure.pdf. inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement these victimization experiences occurred within the past months. the rate of trafficking violations varied markedly across business sectors that typically hire unauthorized migrant workers. construction and janitorial services had the most reported trafficking violations and labour abuses. the findings in this study also suggest that it is likely that the illegal status in the country is the most significant factor contributing to vulnerability to trafficking viola tions. more details of the findings can be found in the final report of the study . using as a basis the estimate of the undocumented mexican migrant population in san diego county the study found that there were roughly undocumented migrant labourers who had experiences that could meet the definition of labour trafficking used in the instrument. this number does not include those whose experiences only involved abuses or exploita tions that do not meet the definition of human trafficking. since there are no national level respondent driven sampling data on labour trafficking topics both the victimization rate and national estimates of labour trafficking victims are impossible to derive. however if the san diego labour trafficking rate were to be applied to the national scale the number of traffick ing victims would be staggering. even if the narrowest definition of human trafficking is adopted i.e. counting only direct and actual violations to physi cal integrity the number of trafficking victims would still be large enough to warrant serious policy debate. this is because the population base of undocu mented immigrants in the united states is so large. any small percentage once applied to such a large population will produce many victims. obvi ously these findings require additional empirical verification because of their serious implications for policymaking and law enforcement initiatives. classical discriminant properties of the san diego instrument aside from the significance of the prevalence estimates more importantly the integrity and structure of the measurement instrument was also tested in this study. the san diego instrument was found to possess excellent discriminant properties. a visual presentation of the instrument s discriminant properties is included in the figure below which shows the clusters of measures and their frequencies relative to their perceived severity. by convention the severity of a crime is generally inversely related to the frequency of its occurrence. in other words homicide is a less frequent crime than robbery which in turn is a less frequent crime than burglary. an instrument attempting to capture criminal activities ought to be able to differentiate between the more serious crimes and the less serious ones. as shown in the figure the instrument was clearly able to differentiate the more serious labour trafficking offences e.g. violations of physical integrity from the less serious ones e.g. abusive labour practices . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume figure i. severity of violations abuses and frequency of occurrence percentage psychometric analysis the ability to distinguish more serious offences from less serious ones is not enough for the validation of the instrument. the authors performed addi tional tests to examine the psychometric properties of the specifi c items. their analytical strategies follow many of the established procedures. at the core of their analytic approach is a novel application of item response theory irt and related item factor analytic methods for instrument development and psychometric evaluation. irt is a state of the art method that has supported most if not all contemporary large scale educational assessments for an introduction to irt see yen and fitzpatrick . researchers are also increasingly becoming aware of the potential benefi ts of irt methodology in health related outcomes research and in mental health assessment . one of the most recent large scale applications of irt in behavioural meas urement is the patient reported outcomes measurement information sys tem promis initiative of the national institutes of health. the application of irt to measurement research in criminal justice is relatively new with only few examples . inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement irt offers distinct practical advantages over traditional classical test theory based methods such as cronbach s alpha . the benefits of irt include but are not limited to a built in mechanism to align scores from different forms of measurement onto the same scale create or maintain item banks with known characteristics to facilitate the assembly of tests sometimes in a hurry as in computerized adaptive testing tailored to specific purposes or individuals and to detect potential differential item functioning across groups of individuals or over time to disentangle group differences from measure ment artefacts. recent technical developments also made possible the routine application of multidimensional irt for more realistically com plex measurement models e.g. longitudinal situations and enhanced preci sion of the resulting scaled scores. the basic building block of parametric irt is the item characteristic curve also known as the traceline that is defined by item parameters such as sever ity and discrimination. the item parameters place an item on the same scale as the latent construct that is being measured e.g. violations of physical integrity or restriction of physical freedom . this is an essential feature of irt based measurement in contrast with classical measurement methods. instead of reporting a single reliability coefficient for an entire scale e.g. cronbach s alpha irt models characterize the reliability of a measurement instrument as a function of the level of the underlying latent construct that is being measured. this feature of irt can be used to identify the best item to administer for a given level of a latent variable. by using the most informative items for a given individual or a given purpose short and tailored instruments e.g. computerized adaptive testing with many fewer items can be just as reli able as longer but static assessments. in sum irt promises significantly reduced respondent burden potentially increased fidelity and a robust frame work for further measurement development. these are welcome features for research and evaluation in the area of criminal justice. to establish the psy chometric properties of the san diego labour trafficking core measures sev eral steps of irt analysis were carried out. initial classical item analysis. first basic item level descriptive statistics were generated. the items were dichotomously scored endorsement of the statement vs. not . the item responses were examined for potentially unen dorsed categories and the proportions in each response category for highly skewed univariate distributions that might cause problems for subsequent analysis. next after appropriate recoding so that the responses were along the same direction for all items the authors plotted for each item the summed score by response category table to examine the empirical category response functions for gross departures from the presumed order of the category response characteristics. the task for this analytic phase was to screen for inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume unusual items that have to be dropped from further irt analysis. at this level of analysis all items were found to have performed well and thus returned for the next step of validation. exploratory and confirmatory item factor analysis. having retained all items from the last step item factor analyses also known as multidimensional irt analysis were then conducted with reckase s multidimensional exten sion of the parameter irt model. the purposes of this step were a to examine the number of dimensions as well as the factor structure underlying the items and b to identify problematic items for deletion such as items that loaded poorly on all dimensions. the authors employed the full information item factor analysis approach using a maximum marginal likelihood estima tor with the raw item response data . they used irtpro software for full information item factor analysis estimation. irt calibration and model fit diagnostics. next the entire sample was subjected to the calibration run. a variety of model fit diagnostics were used to identify sources of potential misfit to settle on a final model . irtpro software was used because of its flexibility and its ability to test competing unidimensional and multidimensional models. the item parameters obtained from the calibra tion run with an item bi factor model are shown in the table on page . irt diagnostic results. as shown in the table the factor structure exhibits the classical item bi factor pattern widely recognized as a valuable model for measurement research with the first general dimension capturing the variation in the primary labour trafficking latent variable and the subsequent dimensions representing additional residual dependence due to context or content. the san diego labour trafficking instrument performed well with all items achieving strong primary dimension item discrimination parameters see slopes which are analogous to factor loadings and associated stand ard error . at a reasonably large sample size n for irt parameter estimation the primary discrimination parameters were statistically signifi cantly different from zero indicating each item contributes significantly to the measurement of the underlying labour trafficking dimension. the item location c parameters are real numbers negatively associated with the sever ity of the item. thus a more severe item will tend to have a smaller c value and vice versa. the varying location parameters provide relatively wide coverage of the underlying labour trafficking dimension despite the intent of the instrument being primarily for screening. more importantly the bi factor structure showed excellent discriminating properties by clearly differentiating subscale items on trafficking violations during transportation items see factor loadings and associated inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement standard error and violations involving physical elements i.e. violence at the workplace items see factor loadings and associated standard error . three additional pairs of items items and deceptions regard ing work pay conditions items and fraudulent representations and items and wage theft were found to exhibit extra residual depend ence and hence additional item doublet dimensions were included in the bi factor model to appropriately handle the dependence. to test the statistical model fit the authors also fitted a unidimensional i.e. single factor parameter irt model to the data set. this model is formally nested within the bi factor model and hence a likelihood ratio test can be conducted to compare the degree of model fit. the unidimensional model has parameters one pair of and c parameters for each of the items . the x log likelihood value is . the bi factor model has parameters and the corresponding x log likelihood value is . standard likelihood theory suggests that the difference in x log likelihoods is distributed as a central chi square variable with degrees of freedom under the null hypothesis that the two models provide the same fit. of course the obtained chi square value of is highly significant on degrees of free dom indicating that the bi factor model fits substantially better than the uni dimensional model. all other model fit diagnostics e.g. the local dependence indices of point to the bi factor model as the preferred model choice . furthermore the m statistic and the corresponding root mean square error of approximation rmsea index provide an overall statement of model fit. the obtained m is on degrees of freedom and the associ ated rmsea is equal to . well below the usual threshold of . indicat ing excellent model fit. the authors believe that the san diego instrument is at a minimum valid for detecting a broad spectrum of labour trafficking violations and abuses though further instrument refinement by adding or subtracting items or revising cer tain items will improve its sensitivity to measurement dimensions. discussion while much more can and should be done to further test and validate the san diego labour trafficking instrument the authors believe the instrument has established several major criteria that ought to be followed as well as scrutinized in all future efforts in developing human trafficking measures. first if labour trafficking is to be defined as a social problem then there inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume table . psychometric properties of the san diego labour trafficking instrument item label a standard error a standard error a standard error a standard error a standard error a standard error c standard error f travel . . . . . . w id . . . . . . f family . . . . . . f other . . . . . . assult . . . . . . threaten . . . . . . hostage . . . . . . pay smug . . . . . . p abuse . . . . . . s abuse . . . . . . threat p . . . . . . threat s . . . . . . lock . . . . . . harm . . . . . . threat fam . . . . . . threat deport . . . . . . threat arrest . . . . . . threat polic . . . . . . harm phy . . . . . . anymanner . . . . . . forb leave . . . restrict . . . . takeid . . . . nofood . . . . forb family . . . . forb cowork . . . . forb outside . . . . conditions . . . . . . nofam permi . . . . nogo permi . . . . seekhelp . . . . lie urself . . . . . . lie employer . . . . . . deny pay . . . . less pay . . . . . . badcheck . . . . . . disappear . . . . . . haza envion . . . . other exp . . . . notes the column headings a a a ... refer to factor loadings. inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement table . psychometric properties of the san diego labour trafficking instrument item label a standard error a standard error a standard error a standard error a standard error a standard error c standard error f travel . . . . . . w id . . . . . . f family . . . . . . f other . . . . . . assult . . . . . . threaten . . . . . . hostage . . . . . . pay smug . . . . . . p abuse . . . . . . s abuse . . . . . . threat p . . . . . . threat s . . . . . . lock . . . . . . harm . . . . . . threat fam . . . . . . threat deport . . . . . . threat arrest . . . . . . threat polic . . . . . . harm phy . . . . . . anymanner . . . . . . forb leave . . . restrict . . . . takeid . . . . nofood . . . . forb family . . . . forb cowork . . . . forb outside . . . . conditions . . . . . . nofam permi . . . . nogo permi . . . . seekhelp . . . . lie urself . . . . . . lie employer . . . . . . deny pay . . . . less pay . . . . . . badcheck . . . . . . disappear . . . . . . haza envion . . . . other exp . . . . notes the column headings a a a ... refer to factor loadings. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume must be shared experiences as opposed to unique individual encounters with common characteristics to allow for the development of common measures. the development of different construct dimensions e.g. viola tion of physical integrity restriction of freedom of movement or deceptive employment tactics thus becomes important as they serve as guideposts for instrumentation purposes. second while acknowledging the differences across countries or regions or economic sectors there need to be consistent items to closely reflect all international legal frameworks and the research community must agree to adhere to those items. consistent wording in the construction of such common measures will facilitate cross national comparison and enable informed policy discourse on the direction of and investment in anti trafficking programmes. third following the model widely adopted in psychology and education the trafficking research community needs to engage in deliberate and thoughtful efforts to construct a common core of measures and to field test and validate them in multiple settings. all steps of validation and test results need to be fully disclosed to allow others to confirm and modify them for their own research purposes. finally a test bank or something to that effect needs to be established perhaps under the auspices of unodc to host various exam ples of trafficking instruments together with their supporting documents and validation studies so that others do not have to reinvent the wheel every time they want to gather data on human trafficking. the lack of consistent meas urement of labour trafficking is hampering empirical research and policy dis course. a valid and reliable instrument is a major building block of empirical methods to obtain valid and reliable data that are badly needed to support anti trafficking initiatives p. . the san diego instrument was constructed to align with the united states government s interpretation of labour trafficking and it has a flexible struc ture that permits different configurations to build a severity index. the core measures of this instrument have also been successfully field tested in north carolina in a separate study with a sample of migrant farmworkers . currently another state wide survey using multi stage probability sampling strategy is under way in north carolina the san diego labour trafficking instrument will be adapted for use in this new study. as more examples of trafficking measurement are made available by researchers or agencies that have conducted empirical studies it will be possible to move steadily towards greater precision in the estimation of the scope of the traf ficking programme. inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement references . united nations office on drugs and crime global report on trafficking in persons . . international labour organization a global alliance against forced labour global report under the follow up to the ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work geneva international labour office . . international labour organization technical consultation on forced labour indicators data collection and national estimates summary report geneva inter national labour office . . frank laczko and david thompson eds. migrant trafficking and human smug gling in europe a review of the evidence with case studies from hungary poland and ukraine geneva international organization for migration . . united states of america department of state office of the under secretary for democracy and global affairs and bureau of public affairs trafficking in persons report june publication washington d.c. united states department of state. . kevin bales disposable people new slavery in the global economy nd ed. berkeley california university of california press . . patrick belser micha lle de cock and farhad mehran ilo minimum esti mate of forced labour in the world geneva international labour office . . international labour organization ilo global estimate of forced labour results and methodology geneva international labour office . . elzbieta m. gozdziak and micah. n. bump data and research on human traf ficking bibliography of research based literature washington d.c. institute for the study of international migration georgetown university . amy farrell and others review of existing estimates of victims of human traffick ing in the united states and recommendations for improving research and measurement of human trafficking washington d.c. humanity united . . t. k. logan robert walker and gretchen hunt understanding human trafficking in the united states trauma violence and abuse vol. no. pp. . . jeffery barrows and reginald finger human trafficking and the healthcare professional southern medical journal vol. no. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume . david a. feingold think again human trafficking foreign policy issue vol. pp. . . patrick belser forced labour and human trafficking estimating the profits working paper no. geneva international labour office march . . united states department of justice assessment of u.s. government efforts to combat trafficking in persons in fiscal year washington d. c. . . bruce kutnick patrick belser and gergana danailova trainor methodologies for global and national estimation of human trafficking victims current and future approaches working paper no. geneva international labour office . . guri tyldum and anette brunovskis describing the unobserved methodo logical challenges in empirical studies on human trafficking in data and research on human trafficking a global survey offprint of the special issue of international migration vol. frank laczko and elzbieta gozdziak eds. geneva international organization for migration pp. . . elzbieta m. gozdziak and elizabeth a. collett research on human trafficking in north america a review of literature in data and research on human trafficking a global survey offprint of the special issue of international migration vol. frank laczko and elzbieta gozdziak eds. geneva international organization for migration pp. . . frank laczko and elzbieta gozdziak eds. data and research on human traf ficking a global survey offprint of the special issue of international migration vol. geneva international organization for migration . . frank laczko and marco a. gramegna developing better indicators of human trafficking brown journal of world affairs vol. x no. summer fall pp. . . micha lle de cock directions for national and international data collection on forced labour working paper no. geneva international labour office . . amy farrell jack mcdevitt and stephanie fahy understanding and improving law enforcement responses to human trafficking final report boston massachusetts institute on race and justice northeastern university . . ernesto u. savona and sonia stefanizzi eds. measuring human trafficking complexities and pitfalls new york springer . . united states department of justice assessment of u.s. government efforts to combat trafficking in persons in fiscal year washington d. c. . . united nations treaty series vol. no. . inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement . united states victims of trafficking and violence protection act of october sect. . . international labour organization hard to see harder to count survey guide lines to estimate forced labour of adults and children geneva international labour office . . amy farrell jack mcdevitt and stephanie fahy where are all the victims understanding the determinants of official identification of human trafficking inci dents criminology and public policy vol. no. pp. . . kevin bales ending slavery how we free today s slaves berkeley california university of california press . . kevin bales and roon soodalter the slave next door human trafficking and slavery in america today berkeley california university of california press . . kara siddharth supply and demand human trafficking in the global econ omy harvard international review vol. no. pp. . . international centre for migration policy development handbook on anti trafficking data collection in south eastern europe developing regional criteria vienna . . international labour organization operational indicators of trafficking in human beings geneva . available at www.ilo.org . . sheldon x. zhang measuring labor trafficking a research note crime law and social change vol. no. pp. . . josine junger tas gert jan terlouw and malcolm w. klein eds. delinquent behavior among young people in the western world first results of the international self report delinquency study studies on crime and justice amsterdam kluwer publica tions . . josine junger tas and others eds. juvenile delinquency in europe and beyond results of the second international self report delinquency study new york springer science and business media . . josine junger tas the significance of the international self report delinquency study isrd european journal on criminal policy and research vol. no. pp. . . wendy m. yen and anne r. fitzpatrick item response theory in educational measurement robert l. brennan eds. th ed. westport connecticut praeger pub lishers pp. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume . maria o. edelen and bryce b. reeve applying item response theory irt modeling to questionnaire development evaluation and refinement quality of life research vol. no. supplement pp. . . robert d. gibbons and others using computerized adaptive testing to reduce the burden of mental health assessment psychiatric services vol. no. pp. . . david cella and others the patient reported outcomes measurement infor mation system promise progress of an nih roadmap cooperative group during its first two years med care vol. no. pp. . . wayne osgood barbara j. mcmorris and maria t. potenza analyzing multiple item measures of crime and deviance i item response theory scaling journal of quantitative criminology vol. no. pp. . . susan e. embretson the new rules of measurement psychological assessment vol. no. pp. . . susan e. embretson and steve p. reise item response theory for psychologists multivariate applications series mahwah new jersey lawrence earlbaum associ ates . . david thissen and lynne steinberg item response theory in the sage hand book of quantitative methods in psychology roger e. millsap and alberto maydeu olivares eds. london sage publications pp. . . li cai high dimensional exploratory item factor analysis by a metropolis hastings robbins monro algorithm psychometrika vol. no. pp. . . li cai metropolis hastings robbins monro algorithm for confirmatory item factor analysis journal of educational and behavioral statistics vol. no. pp. . . li cai a two tier full information item factor analysis model with applica tions psychometrika vol. no. pp. . . li cai ji seung yang and mark hansen generalized full information item bifactor analysis psychological methods vol. no. pp. . . mark d. reckase multidimensional item response theory statistics for social and behavioral sciences series springer new york . . r. d. bock r. gibbons and e. muraki full information item factor analysis applied psychological measurement vol. no. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd counting labour trafficking activities an empirical attempt at standardized measurement . wen h. chen and d. thissen local dependence indices for item pairs using item response theory journal of educational and behavioral statistics vol. no. pp. . . steven p. reise invited paper the rediscovery of bifactor measurement models multivariate behavioral research vol. no. pp. . . a. maydeu olivares and h. joe limited and full information estimation and goodness of fit testing in n contingency tables a united framework journal of the american statistical association vol. no. pp. . . h. j. clawson m. layne and k. small estimating human trafficking into the united states development of a methodology document no. fairfax virginia caliber . . kelle barrick and others when farmworkers and advocates see trafficking but law enforcement does not challenges in identifying labor trafficking in north carolina crime law and social change vol. no. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting of human trafficking numbers by thomas m. steinfatt abstract thomas m. steinfatt argues in his article in favour of counting the actual number of human trafficking cases as an alternative to estimating the size and range of human trafficking through statistical projections. with his research on sex workers in cambodia he shows how data on victims of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation can be obtained by analysing communica tion methods used in the sex industry locating the actual premises and directly observing the criminal activity in progress. keywords counting numbers trafficking in persons sex work cambodia introduction the author currently serves as an adviser on human trafficking to two non governmental organizations one in australia and the other in the united states of america and he works with the united nations inter agency pro ject on human trafficking and the united nations office on drugs and crime unodc . his interest in human trafficking came about through a meeting with werasit sittitrai who was with the thai red cross society. his suggestion to study factors affecting condom use probabilities among foreigner oriented thai sex workers led to him being one of two united states scholars invited to conduct such a study with the support of the chulabhorn research institute. under the patronage of princess chulabhorn of thailand it provided travel support for the international congress on aids in develop ing nations held in bangkok in . data gathering for this study continued throughout the s resulting in the publication of working at the bar sex work and health communication in thailand . information from some of the workers interviewed included situations of potential human trafficking outside of thailand leading to initial data collec tion on human trafficking in cambodia in . an initial study of potential university of miami florida united states of america. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume sex trafficking in phnom penh was completed in and presented to a conference sponsored by the united states department of state . this was followed by data collection throughout cambodia in which was funded and in published by the state department. the united nations inter agency project on human trafficking sponsored a competition beginning in on the best methods of studying human trafficking. entries by the author the school of public health of johns hopkins university and a vietnamese non governmental organization received the top awards. the funding from this award made it possible for data on sex traf ficking to be collected on a large scale throughout cambodia in and published in by the united nations inter agency project on human trafficking as measuring the extent of sex trafficking in cambodia which is discussed in more detail below. trafficking in persons occurs in every country. it is based on the economics of greed on the desire to profit from the work of others without providing just compensation to the workers. human trafficking may also involve various forms of deception and illegal behaviour in order to make this profit. one form of trafficking in persons is trafficking in women and children. the eco nomic activity involved in such trafficking is often sex work. sex trafficking occurs when persons are induced to engage in sex work through force fraud or coercion or when the sex worker is under years of age. sex trafficking is often divided into a trafficked workers who are over and not paid or are grossly underpaid and b workers who are under and who are traf ficked regardless of the level of payment. the presence of workers under increases profit and also may attract paedophiles. theory and rationale in what lines of work does human trafficking occur this article is mainly concerned with methodology the procedures through which the data are obtained and analysed in coming to conclusions about trafficking. while the author s work has concentrated on sex trafficking labour trafficking involving men especially in the fishing industry and unpaid or underpaid domestic work usually involving women make up substantial por tions of the persons trafficked throughout the world. the women involved may be middle aged or older women who live outside under the stairs of their employer s house in a middle or upper class neighbourhood or sleep under a inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers tarpaulin near their employer s car and who are often paid so little or so infre quently that they cannot afford to leave and if they do attempt to leave their prospects of succeeding are not good. sex trafficking is not as common as these forms of trafficking but it has become a focal point for action against all forms of human trafficking. why does human trafficking occur the motivation of traffickers is primarily monetary obtaining money for the labour of those trafficked and either underpaying or simply not paying the workers. sex work is a business. its goal is to make money and sex trafficking is a small but important portion of this business. sex trafficking occurs in the context of the sex business. it is not a separate enterprise but a part of the business of sex work. the motivation for sex trafficking is commercial and monetary to make money not to enslave. sex trafficking is not motivated by evil people who set out to do harm it is motivated by greed. it occurs when people are not concerned about the harm they cause to others. it occurs when people are willing to allow or even sponsor the harming of others if a profit can be made from it. sex traffickers are evil because they do not care about the harm and suffering they cause. the evil of human trafficking is incidental to the malicious behaviour of traffickers. it is a result not a cause. observing and collecting data on the operation of sex work enterprises in thailand in the s and cambodia in the decade that followed led to sev eral generalizations concerning the points at which sex work is most likely to be observed and the nature of the clientele at those points as discussed in steinfatt and baker . where do sex work and sex trafficking occur data gathered by the author indicate that sex work is not evenly distributed across geographical areas. it normally occurs only at or near geographical points a where a sufficient population of males in the age group exists permanently or sporadically or travels past b where there is a mini mum of limiting factors such as easy observability by neighbours and relatives c where the males have sufficient disposable income to support sex work d where the males have knowledge of the norms of sex work or are part of a network of men that includes some who have this knowledge and e where sex work exists and at least some of the males know about its existence. while cities and larger population centres have brothels not all villages have a sex work venue. the probability of a sex work venue existing increases both inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume with the size of the population of the village and with the increasing distance to the nearest village with a sex work venue. thus sex work is far less likely to occur in rural areas that are not gathering places and is more likely to occur in or near more populated locations and along or near transportation routes where substantial numbers of people regularly pass in the course of their every day activity. assumptions and rationale for the methods used in the cambodia studies a commercial enterprise wishing to maximize profits must communicate its existence and location to potential customers. once a customer encounters a specific brothel its location is known to him and he will be able to inform friends who may not know of it. such repeat customers and their friends pro vide only a small level of profits for the business. in order to achieve high profits a larger customer base is needed. there must be a way other than word of mouth of informing potential customers of the existence purpose and location of the business. typical methods of communicating this infor mation for sex work businesses include developing personal contacts with local transportation and lodging workers who are likely to encounter poten tial customers. sex work businesses in cambodia typically inform taxi drivers of the kickback they will receive if they bring new customers interested in their particular services to their enterprise. this amount usually varies between and per cent of the cost for sex per customer but it may be higher in certain cases. taxi drivers in all parts of the world are aware of such kickbacks and are moti vated to know many sex work locations in their areas. this allows them to satisfy customers receive tips and receive kickbacks from sex businesses. newly arrived males often hint at or ask taxi drivers to take them to a place where sex is available. thus taxi drivers become an excellent source of infor mation concerning the location of sex work both from satisfying customers and receiving payment from them and from satisfying sex businesses and receiving payment from them. since sex trafficking occurs within sex work venues all sex trafficking venues ought to be found within the set of sex work venues located within a given area. it is sometimes claimed that there are hidden brothels brothels that can not be found but contain trafficked women and children. the concept of brothels that cannot be found could not exist simply because they would not be economically viable. if few people know of their existence and if word of their existence and how to locate them is not spread then their profits will be inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers limited. a brothel that cannot be found by potential customers would fail immediately. locations where victims of kidnapping might be held such as the house dis covered in in cleveland ohio where the victims had been held for over a decade are not brothels. some brothels such as those with children will be far more cautious in admit ting customers than others and will provide information on their existence only to individuals whom they trust usually including specific taxi drivers. information on the location of such brothels will exist but there are fewer persons and places to act as sources from where the information can be obtained. conversations with multiple unattached males who are visiting the country and are encountered at bars and restaurants are often helpful in obtaining such location. understanding the method of communication used in the advertising of sex workers services and of other illegal enterprises requiring customers for profitability including sex trafficking can be helpful in developing a method for locating such services. some such places are hinted at in websites but specific information on locations is almost never present. once a researcher has located a place with trafficked women and children he or she should contact the management personnel as the management per sonnel in such places know who is under age and who has been trafficked. the researcher must determine methods of obtaining this information from management without arousing suspicion. brief conversations with manage ment are part of the everyday work of brothels can normally be conducted in english and arouse less suspicion than attempts to extract such information from workers. most sex workers in a bar brothel or other sex venue are avail able to leave with a customer. one indication that a sex worker may been trafficked is the inability of the sex worker to leave the venue. another indica tion is the existence of a debt contract. elaboration of assumptions and rationale as they lead to location theory sex trafficking is a commercial enterprise. its purpose is to make money. repeat customers keep a sex venue afloat but they alone cannot form the sizeable customer base for the level of profits that are its primary motive. in any society some individuals are willing to provide sexual labour in exchange for something of value if the monetary reward is sufficient given their current economic position. as the management cost of sexual labour the money received by the sex workers from management for their labour increases the inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume desire of management in sex work venues to lower labour costs becomes more apparent. using underpaid or unpaid labourers persons who are forced to work at a rate that is lower than the going rate or children who provide a greater profit margin are possible solutions. this desire and its solutions lead to the trafficking of sex workers. greater profits are dependent on a constant stream of new customers. some form of advertising is required in order to provide new customers for sex venues. information about sex venues is often communicated by word of mouth by contacting a population likely to be interested in the purchase of sexual services. one efficient method of establishing such contact is through local persons who normally encounter potential customers and also serve to pre screen potential customers to see if they are interested in sex venues. local individu als generally make up the majority of the customer base for most sex venues. local customers know the local price structure for sex and alternative loca tions where sexual services can be obtained. thus they provide less revenue per customer than travelling businessmen military personnel transportation workers such as truck drivers and tourists who may not know the prices or may not know whether similar services are available nearby. increased profits are often related to the ability to contact this potential customer base. because of the nature of sexual services such contact requires a level of dis creetness and privacy. public advertising using for example the media or announcements made by a bus driver carrying a load of passengers into town from an airport does not provide the necessary discreetness and privacy. taxi and limousine services encounter the desired groups of travelling business men military personnel and tourists. they normally transport passengers in smaller groups providing the desired level of discreetness and privacy. thus taxi drivers provide an ideal medium for word of mouth advertising of sex businesses. they are often a principal source of new customers for sex venues in any area with sufficient population to support a taxi business. this position led to the method used in the study for locating women and children traf ficked for sexual purposes. obtaining knowledge related to sex outlet locations can also occur by observ ing public locations such as airports other transportation stations restau rants bars hotel lobbies and the like. such observational methods can be aided if required by considering the likely and the possible methods of trans mitting such information. the channels usually are not standard advertising methods radio and television billboards etc. though they may provide hints of the existence of the illegal activity. consideration of the demographic inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers characteristics of typical and prospective customers of the type of vice in question will often provide strong hints as to where to look and perhaps a direct answer. once initial information on possible locations is obtained it can be used to approach and enter the venues in question and to access information con cerning what if any forms of the activity in question are available. how is it that persons seeking sex locate places that sell it some form of communica tion of this information is occurring. the method is to determine that form and then to tap into it using informants who are demographically similar to the principal customer base of the establishment to be entered. statistical analysis and direct observation statistical methods of studying crimes such as human trafficking provide important information on the size and often on the nature of the illegal activ ity over both large and small areas of land. many researchers are rightly con cerned with estimating the size and range of human trafficking through statistical projections from available data. an alternative to such calculations is counting. counting requires something to count perhaps through the observation of human trafficking in progress. it is often more time consuming than statistical projections and almost always involves a more limited geo graphical area in any one study. it often involves direct observation of the criminal activity in progress. studies of the communication methods used in human trafficking and other illegal activity can provide information on the size and nature of trafficking though such studies are usually restricted by the constraints of time and money and almost always require male rather than female informants concerning customers. an additional plus for methods based on communication systems is that they can provide information on the physical location of victims an important item that statistical methods cannot provide with precision. why study brothels rather than points of origin of sex trafficking human trafficking is potentially visible throughout its sequence from the victim s point of origin through any transit stages that may occur to its des tination forms. the origin and transit stages are money losers for the traffick ers. only in the destination stage where the victim is put to work does the trafficker begin to recoup any expenses incurred during the origin and transit stages. human trafficking need not involve transportation to a new location. such transportation when it occurs is often intended to remove the victim from familiar surroundings where help for the victim is most likely to be inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume available and also to locate the victim at a point of destination that is likely to maximize profit and minimize risk of detection. human trafficking is most often observed in that destination stage due largely to the far longer period where trafficking victims may be held at a single location or at a few locations nearby. once transported victims may be kept in the vicinity of the same destination for weeks or months sometimes longer. many methods of locating human trafficking in its destination stage are avail able. it is possible to simply stumble upon human trafficking in the process of daily living yet it is highly unlikely that this will occur. most persons encoun tering human trafficking would not recognize it for what it is. this is also true of the point of origin and the transit stage of trafficking. well meaning cam paigns against trafficking often propose raising awareness of this form as the principal and often the only method of location a suggestion doomed to failure for the vast majority of victims and observers. most human traffick ing is not visible in any of its forms or stages to the general public through casual observation. if attempts by anti trafficking groups to motivate the pub lic to immediately report to police or to a hotline any suspected instance of such trafficking were to succeed the police or the hotline would be inundated with such reports. a likely result would be to store all the reports with the police probably without prioritizing them and the police would examine the reports when the time money and officers became available. as the volume of reports increases true reports become more difficult to sort out from the overload of false reports and hotlines are of little help in processing such information accurately. how might sex trafficking victims be located in addition to counting how might sex trafficking victims be located in addition to counting the author asked this question in cambodia. the methods used in three studies in cambodia were similar varying only in detail. such data were first gathered in cambodia in . three methods were used initially in phnom penh moto taxi drivers local government counts provided by the police and a small scale study using city block sampling. information from a study by the united nations development programme undp and information from the world gazetteer website was used to project the results obtained in phnom penh to the larger cities towns and main highways of cambodia outside of phnom penh to create a countrywide estimate of sex trafficking in cambodia. taxi drivers were initially sought out as a principal source of information. the drivers usually operate motorbikes referred to as motodops or simply motos. moto drivers are among the principal customers of brothels and are aware of inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers most entertainment venues in their service area in addition to receiving kick backs for customers they bring to those locations. they are often called upon by local customers to transport the customers to a location where sex is sold. typically a moto driver passing by in traffic is hailed by a lone team member and asked if the driver knows where sex can be purchased. drivers who are waiting for passengers are not selected. the answer is invariably yes . the driver is then asked to transport the passenger to that location. on arrival the team member unobtrusively clicks the global positioning system gps in order to record the location looks briefly at the venue from the outside and asks the driver if he would like to be paid or if he would like to show the pas senger another venue. in almost all cases the driver wishes to continue. the driver is encouraged to drive to hidden locations in addition to popular locations perhaps locations not often visited or visited only by people with money or locations with sex workers who are unusual in some way or young. after several such locations have been recorded the passenger pays the driver what is owed and asks if the driver would like to work with him longer for a set amount. the driver usually agrees to work longer in which case the pro cess continues until the driver wants to stop or can think of no new places. if the driver does not agree to work longer he is simply paid and if there is time left the team member then walks one or two blocks hails another moto that is driving down the street never one parked at a location and continues the process. this provides a clean break between each successive moto driver on a given day and none know of the other s work or of any prior actions of the researcher. this process continued between a.m. and p.m. seven days a week. in the evening the teams meet and the information from each gps is trans ferred to a computer map of the area under study. the mapping of the obtained locations of sex venues was essentially ruled complete when inde pendent informants familiar with sex work locations in a given area produced no new venues in that area over several days. the product of this method is a gps mapping of potential sex work locations for each area. in addition to these counts which provided the main data for the study local government counts of entertainment places a euphemism for places where sex is sold were provided by the police and a small scale study using city block sampling was carried out to check the reliability of the moto driver results. the data were collected only in phnom penh and a study of the area outside of it was not carried out until the following year. the estimated number of sex workers found in phnom penh in was of whom had probably been trafficked it was estimated that sex workers had been trafficked throughout cambodia see tables . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume data provided by undp on national highways and on city size from the world gazetteer website were used in estimating trafficking outside of phnom penh for the report. these methods are presented in more detail in steinfatt baker and beesey . in in a study funded by the united states agency for international development usaid data on human trafficking were gathered in all cambodian provinces using the geographical mapping methods employed in phnom penh in . research teams in funding from the award competition sponsored by the united nations inter agency project on human trafficking on best methods of studying human trafficking was used for the large scale collection of data on sex trafficking throughout cambodia . while the and studies used only two research teams six research teams were used in the study five for gathering data in specific sections of the country and one for studying the entire country. the five teams studying specific sections of the country teams a b c d and e each had four members an expatriate as team leader and three local assistants. the team leader and the primary research assistant were experienced in trafficking research and were made aware of the purpose and nature of the research concerning trafficking. the other two local assistants on each team were hired as day labourers on the basis of their familiarity with the sex venues in a specific area. the sixth team team f was used only to locate sex venues throughout cambodia in both the areas stud ied and those not studied by teams a e. the teams worked independently did not meet each other and did not share information. workers were not hired as team members if they were not famil iar with sex work venues catering to local males of their economic and socio demographic class. their task was to do throughout cambodia what the research teams had begun in phnom penh in to locate and then obtain data on possible trafficking in all populated locations in the country. teams a and b studied phnom penh independently while studies of the provinces outside of phnom penh were conducted independently by teams a c d and e. each used different starting points and starting dates during july see the map . the author subsequently learned that the data on city size from the world gazetteer website were inaccurate. the world gazetteer depends on figures provided by each country in the case of cambodia the ministry of planning lists the entire population of each of the provinces in the country as though it were the population of the largest town or village in that province. inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers location methods some data gathering methods were modified to suit different conditions in the provinces. while there are hundreds of moto drivers in phnom penh in smaller areas such as villages there are few drivers and they know each other. in such cases one driver passing by is hailed and employed for brothel loca tion. the assistance of two or more local males is then requested depending on the population size. if a male approached by a local assistant says that he knows the sex outlets in the area he is asked to show the location to the assistant if it is not far. if it is some distance away the male is then asked for specific directions which are recorded. this process continues between a.m. and p.m. seven days a week. the location data obtained in this manner were transferred at the end of each day to both a gps map and a hardcopy map. the mapping of the obtained sex venue locations is considered to be essentially complete when five consecutive independent informants familiar with sex work locations in a given area are no longer able to locate new venues in that area. the outcome of this method is a gps mapping of potential sex work locations for each area. this location method was used by teams a c d and e. team b which focused on phnom penh and did not visit the countryside used a different location method. team b traversed each of the streets of the city and investigated each building for sex work and trafficking. the results for all teams in phnom penh were similar regardless of the method used. routes covered by research teams a c d and e legend for routes covered black lines indicate routes covered by at least two of the five research teams. blue lines indicate routes covered by at least one of the five research teams. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume local team members were successful in locating many places with predomi nantly local clientele usually brothels massage establishments and karaoke clubs and occasionally common evening meeting areas for dating at times with freelance workers. expatriate team members were also shown such ven ues but they were often shown considerably higher priced establishments as well such as large expensive clubs. in some areas particularly bavet phnom penh battambang pailin and poipet the clubs were occasionally part of a complex involving a hotel or a hotel and casino. as in all of the studies demographic similarity with the customers of each individual venue includ ing their language and where possible their accent was used as the selection criterion for the team members entering the establishments to gather data. data gathering methods once the mapping is ruled to be complete for an area the locations are visited to observe the demographics and languages of the customers entering and leaving the specific venue. when the customer demographics are determined for a specific brothel club hotel or any other location where sex is sold a team member closely matching those demographics is selected. the team member enters the venue and makes a mental note of the number of sex workers present including the number of small ladies workers appearing to be under the age of and their ethnicity likely age language demeanour and other characteristics. he then asks whether any worker he chooses would be able to leave the establishment with him. if any cannot leave he asks which ones or how many. he was encouraged to talk with the workers and management informally just as he would in entering any brothel or other such venue. informant reports to team members were often brief and in a simple form such as five vietnamese one small and she cannot leave . they were told to memorize the information instead of taking notes and never to take notes within or near any venue they surveyed. if an informant needed to make written notes he could do that when he was out of sight of the venue. at least two teams visited each located venue. interviewers visited venues during normal working hours and in populated areas such as a city town or large village at least one day apart between team visits. in smaller villages and rural areas only one interviewer entered and collected data. the expatriate team member entered and obtained data from venues with an expatriate cus tomer base. if one of the local team members matched the venue s customer demographics that team member served as interviewer. if no team member inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers matched the customer demographics a local person usually a moto driver who had not been encountered previously was engaged in conversation by a local team member and asked if he was familiar with the venue in question. potential interviewers were selected for the task only if they were reasonably talkative and responsive in their meeting with the team member as they were to talk with the brothel workers and management and find out typical brothel information such as whether particular workers could leave the brothel and whether any small ladies worked there but were not currently visible. none of the research teams had contact with each other prior to submitting their final reports. gps coordinates were used to identify venues and to col late data from the teams. team f travelled the highways and all backroads of cambodia over a period of several months to count and record gps locations for all sex venues in the country. they did not enter locations and gather data. this provided a check on the coverage obtained by teams a e. their task was to travel through each province outside of phnom penh principally to com pile a list of all sex venues located in cambodia outside of phnom penh. its members counted the total number of venues of each type in each area inde pendently of all other teams. these data were then compared with the data located mapped and reported in the data set produced by teams a c d and e creating a basis for an estimate of the extent of trafficking in the venues located by team f but missed by the other teams. conversations with sex workers in cambodia occurring since support the view that workers are normally free to leave the workplace with a cus tomer and are free to return to their homes when their work hours for the day are completed. many sex venues do not have a place where sex can occur on the premises and workers are expected to leave with customers. brothels have areas used for sex on the premises and are always open for business hours a day even when the doors are locked and everyone inside is asleep. police raids occurring between and may have increased caution among brothel management about openly providing information on women working off a debt. if management is concerned that a worker may run out on a debt go to authorities or do something similar that worker is probably not allowed to leave the premises. these were used as indications of trafficking in the study. trafficked workers were defined as those under years of age or those wanting to leave the venue but not allowed to do so see tables . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume table . observed number of venues and estimated number of sex workers by type of venue and province corrected for workers not present and missed venues province variable direct indirect brothel massage establishment subtotal karaoke club bar or restaurant beer pub freelance subtotal total banteay meanchey venues workers battambang venues workers kampong cham venues workers kampong chhnang venues workers kampong speu venues workers kampong thom venues workers kampot venues workers kandal venues workers koh kong venues workers kratie venues workers mondul kiri venues workers phnom penh venues workers preah vihear venues workers prey veng venues workers inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers table . observed number of venues and estimated number of sex workers by type of venue and province corrected for workers not present and missed venues province variable direct indirect brothel massage establishment subtotal karaoke club bar or restaurant beer pub freelance subtotal total banteay meanchey venues workers battambang venues workers kampong cham venues workers kampong chhnang venues workers kampong speu venues workers kampong thom venues workers kampot venues workers kandal venues workers koh kong venues workers kratie venues workers mondul kiri venues workers phnom penh venues workers preah vihear venues workers prey veng venues workers inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume province variable direct indirect brothel massage establishment subtotal karaoke club bar or restaurant beer pub freelance subtotal total pursat venues workers ratanak kiri venues workers siem reap venues workers sihanoukville venues workers stung treng venues workers svay rieng venues workers takeo venues workers odar meanchey venues workers kep venues workers pailin venues workers outside phnom penh venues workers cambodia venues workers notes venues the observed number of venues meaning the number of venues of a given type observed by team f during workers estimated number of workers table . observed number of venues and estimated number of sex workers by type of venue and province corrected for workers not present and missed venues continued inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers province variable direct indirect brothel massage establishment subtotal karaoke club bar or restaurant beer pub freelance subtotal total pursat venues workers ratanak kiri venues workers siem reap venues workers sihanoukville venues workers stung treng venues workers svay rieng venues workers takeo venues workers odar meanchey venues workers kep venues workers pailin venues workers outside phnom penh venues workers cambodia venues workers notes venues the observed number of venues meaning the number of venues of a given type observed by team f during workers estimated number of workers inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume table . observed number of venues with trafficking and management sex worker estimates of trafficked women and children by ethnicity and trafficked status area observed number of venues with trafficking number of trafficked women and children trafficked status a name total type of venue total ethnicity under years of age cannot leave brothel massage establishment other viet namese khmer chinese viet namese khmer viet namese khmer chinese banteay meanchey battambang kampong cham kampong chhnang kampong speu kampong thom kampot kandal koh kong kratie mondul kiri phnom penh preah vihear prey veng pursat ratanak kiri siem reap sihanoukville stung treng svay rieng takeo odar meanchey kep pailin outside phnom penh cambodia a numbers under trafficked status are not always independent as the same individual can be classified as both under years of age and cannot leave and will not necessarily add to numbers under number of trafficked women and children . inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers table . observed number of venues with trafficking and management sex worker estimates of trafficked women and children by ethnicity and trafficked status area observed number of venues with trafficking number of trafficked women and children trafficked status a name total type of venue total ethnicity under years of age cannot leave brothel massage establishment other viet namese khmer chinese viet namese khmer viet namese khmer chinese banteay meanchey battambang kampong cham kampong chhnang kampong speu kampong thom kampot kandal koh kong kratie mondul kiri phnom penh preah vihear prey veng pursat ratanak kiri siem reap sihanoukville stung treng svay rieng takeo odar meanchey kep pailin outside phnom penh cambodia a numbers under trafficked status are not always independent as the same individual can be classified as both under years of age and cannot leave and will not necessarily add to numbers under number of trafficked women and children . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume table . comparison of high end estimated number of trafficked women and children by ethnicity and trafficking type in cambodia and year ethnicity how traffickeda area of trafficking khmer vietnamese other cambodia total under years of age debt contract cannot leave cambodia total phnom penh provinces cambodia total .. .. b .. .. .. .. source thomas m. steinfatt and simon baker measuring the extent of sex trafficking in cambodia bangkok united nations inter agency project on human trafficking table . a the entries under the column headings under years of age debt contract and cannot leave are not independent so they may not add up to the total for cambodia. b . per cent of . table . estimated number of sex workers in cambodia based on national studies study research group year number of sex workers direct indirect total national assembly nchads nchads nchads nchads steinfatt baker and beesey nchads nchads a steinfatt steinfatt and baker mean of studies mean of studies mean of studies mean of studies sources thomas m. steinfatt simon baker and allan beesey measuring the number of trafficked women in cambodia part i november and thomas m. steinfatt and simon baker measuring the extent of sex trafficking in cambodia bangkok united nations inter agency project on human trafficking table . note nchads national center for hiv aids dermatology and std of cambodia. a data listed by nchads as its most reliable data collected to that date. inner e ck hk.indd calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers table . comparison of high end estimated number of trafficked women and children by ethnicity and trafficking type in cambodia and year ethnicity how traffickeda area of trafficking khmer vietnamese other cambodia total under years of age debt contract cannot leave cambodia total phnom penh provinces cambodia total .. .. b .. .. .. .. source thomas m. steinfatt and simon baker measuring the extent of sex trafficking in cambodia bangkok united nations inter agency project on human trafficking table . a the entries under the column headings under years of age debt contract and cannot leave are not independent so they may not add up to the total for cambodia. b . per cent of . table . estimated number of sex workers in cambodia based on national studies study research group year number of sex workers direct indirect total national assembly nchads nchads nchads nchads steinfatt baker and beesey nchads nchads a steinfatt steinfatt and baker mean of studies mean of studies mean of studies mean of studies sources thomas m. steinfatt simon baker and allan beesey measuring the number of trafficked women in cambodia part i november and thomas m. steinfatt and simon baker measuring the extent of sex trafficking in cambodia bangkok united nations inter agency project on human trafficking table . note nchads national center for hiv aids dermatology and std of cambodia. a data listed by nchads as its most reliable data collected to that date. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume references . thomas m. steinfatt working at the bar sex work and health communication in thailand westport connecticut ablex publishing . http www.amazon.com working bar communication discourse millennium dp x . thomas m. steinfatt research on trafficking in persons in cambodia. paper presented at the international roundtable discussion on trafficking in women and children sponsored by the asia foundation held in phnom penh on may . . thomas m. steinfatt and simon baker measuring the extent of sex trafficking in cambodia bangkok united nations inter agency project on human traffick ing . http www.no trafficking.org reports docs estimates uniap cb estimates report.pdf . united nations development programme cambodia hiv vulnerability map ping highways one and five bangkok . http www.hivdevelopment.org pdf files cambodia hiv vulnerability mapping.pdf . environmental systems research institute esri data and maps an esri white paper redlands california cd rom. . thomas m. steinfatt simon baker and allan beesey measuring the number of trafficked women in cambodia part i november . http www. childtrafficking.com docs steinfatt measuring cambodia.pdf . thomas m. steinfatt measuring the number of trafficked women and children in cambodia a direct observation field study part iii october . http www. childtrafficking.com docs steinfatt measuring t.pdf inner e ck hk.indd proposed utilization of the network scale up method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons by janie f. shelton abstract trafficking in persons is one of the gravest of crimes but the scope and extent of the crime as measured by the number of victims have scarcely been quanti fied. generating data on the population of trafficked persons presents a unique challenge because it tends to be a very hidden population much more hidden than other hidden populations such as the homeless population or the drug injecting population. epidemiological methods to detect hidden populations have advanced in recent years with a variety of research papers describing the use of the network scale up method to detect key affected and other subpopulations. the approach relies on conducting a survey of the gen eral population in which questions are asked about the number of individuals of interest in the personal network of the respondent and a specific set of questions are devised to estimate the size of the respondent s network. advan tages include the detection of multiple populations of trafficked persons in one survey the minimization of harm to respondents for divulging first hand knowledge and improved statistical accuracy achieved by averaging over a large sample. disadvantages include limited knowledge of the covariates of the population being surveyed. keywords epidemiological methods hidden populations network scale up method trafficking in persons introduction trafficking in persons is a complex criminal act whereby a person is coerced into an exploited circumstance for the purposes of slavery organ removal sex ual exploitation or other form of forced labour and it involves a wide range of statistics and surveys section united nations office on drugs and crime. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume transportation scenarios either within or across national borders. trafficking in persons is a crime most often detected from reported incidents which rep resents only a fraction of all cases with the vast majority of victims hidden from view. in the international labour organization ilo estimated that there were . million persons in forced labour and recommended more national surveys to produce better global estimates in the future . because of the extremely hidden nature of trafficking in persons and the varied aspects of the exploitation that takes place estimating the prevalence or number of victims of such trafficking presents a unique challenge. while various estab lished epidemiological methods to survey hidden populations could be consid ered in the present article a less known technique is discussed the network scale up method a method that is implemented in a survey of the general popu lation. the network scale up method was specifically designed to estimate the size of hard to count or impossible to count populations. owing to recent devel opments in the field it holds promise as a research method for estimating the dark number of trafficked persons at the national level for a variety of reasons. primarily the network scale up method is distinguished from other methods used to detect hidden populations e.g. multiplier methods the capture recapture method or respondent driven sampling because it leverages data from a survey conducted among the general population instead of among victims or perpetrators of trafficking in persons who may be difficult or impossible to find or unwilling to talk. the underlying principle is that some fraction of the general population will know someone who fits the case definition in this case someone who has been trafficked and the average prevalence of trafficked persons within networks of individuals from the general population will approximate the population prevalence of the subpopulation itself see the figure . while this article does not include a comprehensive review of the methodology it presents some of the key ideas to consider prior to designing a study that uses the network scale up method to measure the prevalence of trafficking in persons at the national or subnational level. in article of the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organized crime trafficking in persons is defined as follows trafficking in persons shall mean the recruitment transportation transfer harbouring or receipt of persons by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion of abduction of fraud of deception of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation. exploitation shall include at a minimum the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation forced labour or services slavery or practices similar to slavery servitude or the removal of organs general assembly resolution annex ii . a comprehensive review of this methodology can be found in bernard and others . inner e ck hk.indd proposed utilization of the method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons principle of the network scale up method the average prevalence of the subpopulation across a sample of net works of individuals from the general population will reflect the distri bution or overall prevalence of that subpopulation in that society where m number of people in a subgroup that the respondent knows c social network size of the survey respondent e population size of the subgroup t general population size background the network scale up method was first developed and published by h.r. ber nard and c. mccarty professors at the university of florida. one of the earli est surveys was based on a need to estimate the number of deaths from the earthquake in mexico city in where it was observed there must be thousands dead everyone knows someone who died. while it is relatively straightforward to ask a sample of the general population how many people they knew who had died in the earthquake estimating their personal network size proved more challenging. using research methods and social network theory the idea that it is possible to estimate the population prevalence by leveraging information stored within the social network has evolved. in killworth and others compared estimates of the seroprevalence of hiv rape and homelessness in the united states with other known esti mates and found them to be comparable in all three cases. since then the network scale up method has been used by a variety of researchers to esti mate hidden populations such as the number of heroin users in cities in the united states populations at risk of hiv in ukraine heavy drug users in other words the estimates were within the confidence intervals of previously published estimates. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume in curitiba brazil hiv affected populations in chongqing china groups at risk of hiv aids in kerman islamic republic of iran and the population size of men who have sex with men in japan . in the study evaluating the population size of men who have sex with men in japan an internet based survey approach was used the results were similar to other reported estimates. the approach offered a variety of benefits including efficiency simplicity and low cost compared with conventional methods . in the study to evaluate the size of groups at risk of hiv aids in kerman islamic republic of iran two different methods were contrasted probability that you know just one person in the subpopulation of interest and frequency the number of people you know . both of these approaches can be used at the analytical phase without consideration in the survey design but for highly stigmatized issues it is worthy of consideration to ask do you know at least one person who as opposed to how many people do you know who . the broad international spectrum of publications using this method has pro duced a rich literature on the effectiveness and constraints of the method itself as well as validation of the approach by comparison with other reliable sources or previous estimates. perhaps most useful are the questions posed to estimate the personal network sizes in each publication which relies on cul turally specific information and available data in each milieu. methodology the calculation of the prevalence of a hidden population using the network scale up method requires two key components a estimating the personal network size of members of a random sample of the population using where l personal network size of person i mij number of people in subpopulation j known by person i e.g. the number of women known to person i who gave birth ej size of subgroup j e.g. the number of women who gave birth in the total population known t size of the general population known inner e ck hk.indd proposed utilization of the method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons b estimating the number of members of a hidden subpopulation e.g. trafficked persons and standard error of the estimate where estimated size of the hidden population m number of people known by person i estimated personal network size of person i t size of the general population known note m and can come from different sources. challenges to consider what does it mean to know someone how to estimate in a critical development in this area came from a paper by mccormick salganik and zhen describing the best ways to estimate the denominator or the personal network size of the survey respondents. the suggested working defini tion of to know someone is that you know them and they know you by sight or by name that you could contact them that they live within your country and that there has been some contact either in person or by telephone or mail in the past years . there are two prevailing approaches to estimating personal network size e.g. the denominator of the respondent the scale up method and the summation method. the scale up method relies on the fraction of a known population who are known to an individual e.g. the number of police officers known to a fictitious person named sam . if sam knows police officers and there are police officers in the country sam knows people in the country . for most surveys approximately known population sizes are estimated. for examples of known populations see the table. . . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume examples of known populations used to estimate personal network size of respondents using the question how many do you know examples of known populations in the context of china drawn from guo and others examples of known populations in the context of the united statesa males aged years women named rose females aged years men named jack females aged or older women named gloria government officials women who gave birth in the past year registered policemen men who are in the armed forces registered physicians postal workers sources wei guo and others estimating the size of hiv key affected populations in chongqing china using the network scale up method plos one vol. no. and tyler h. mccormick matthew j. salganik and tian zhen how many people do you know efficiently estimating personal network size journal of the american statistical association vol. no. . a names deserve careful consideration and must only represent . . per cent of the population according to mccormick salganik and zhen . research on known population sizes shows that the best results are obtained when the known population size is between and per cent of the population . the scale up method requires that the survey include a range of questions regarding known populations so that the estimated network size is averaged over a broad grouping of people. the summation method involves adding together the respondents answers for segments of their network e.g. family members work colleagues sports teammates church associates . for more details on each technique see mccormick salganik and zhen . estimation effects recalling characteristics of people who are known is not perfect if a person lives in a community where trafficking victims are known to be tar geted it is likely that the person knows something about some people but not everything about everyone the person knows. though larger sample sizes can account for random sampling error response error cannot be accounted for . barrier effects there are different probabilities of knowing someone in the hidden population among members of the general population victims of trafficking may be known only to members of certain villages or among marginalized subpopulations. therefore sampling methods would need to consider the likelihood of encountering someone who knows a traf ficking victim in the general population and potentially oversample in areas inner e ck hk.indd proposed utilization of the method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons where those persons may be found to ensure that the survey does not only detect null responses. in this case sampling weights would be needed to account for the sampling scheme. transmission error would a person know if someone in his or her personal network had been a victim of human trafficking it is likely that many victims of exploitation do not reveal to their friends and family the full extent of their condition which may vary depending on the type of exploitation. for example in some countries qualitative research shows that families are involved in facilitating the process for remuneration but in many cases the true nature of the event is only known to the traffickers and victims themselves. transmission error defined as the limited number of persons within an individual s network who will know about the crime or circumstances of the individual is a particular challenge for research on the subject of trafficked persons. further it has been shown that transmission error is more likely with highly stigmatized behaviours. qualitative research in advance of developing a survey method would allow for an estimate of trans mission error to be developed and a correction factor can be calculated to compensate for this bias. implementation the implementation of the network scale up method survey requires a plan ning trajectory similar to that of the general population survey and can be easily embedded in a national population survey with a different focus but it differs in terms of formative research. pilot testing is critical to understand ing the best known populations to use for the scale up network size estimates to avoid wasted time and missed opportunities in the final survey. for exam ple in advance of designing the survey questionnaire researchers must estab lish a list of known population sizes to generate the network size estimates and pilot test the size estimates. once the pilot test results come in back calculation methods are used to validate the population sizes and isolate network size estimation to the populations that fell within a reasonable range of the true population size. the questionnaire can be shortened once poorly performing known population sizes are identified. for a good example of how this is done see guo and others . one key component of the formative research component of measuring the prevalence of human trafficking using the network scale up method is the inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume estimation of transmission error. how many people who are trafficked tell anyone they know what has happened to them interviews with a sample of the population of interest should lend insight into the size of the network of people who know about the condition of their contact. it has been docu mented that key affected populations such as hiv positive individuals only reveal their status to approximately one third of the people in their personal network. thus the correction factor for transmission error is quite important in estimating the true size of the population of interest. strengths and weaknesses of using the network scale up method to estimate the prevalence of trafficking in persons a key weakness of the network scale up method approach is the lack of covar iates. if interviewers made direct contact with victims covariates such as age race education and other data on other characteristics could easily be col lected to further describe the subpopulation of victims of trafficking in per sons but because the estimate is produced based on the number known to members of the general population these microdata would not be available. however with data obtained by the network scale up method estimates of the age and gender profiles of the target population e.g. trafficked persons can be made using statistical methods. these methods are based on leverag ing information about the respondents network characteristics to impute covariate data. for more on this see mccormick and zheng . the strengths of using the network scale up method include minimization of random error the ability to estimate several hidden populations simultane ously and lower risk to victims of the crime. because of the natural averaging over an adequate sample size the effects of random error from small numbers will be minimized when the network scale up method is used which not the case in surveys of victims. while in surveys of victims valuable qualitative information can be learned such quantification relies on larger numbers as random error declines as the sample size increases. finally the network scale up method can be used as a survey module within a larger national survey both to increase the sample size and minimize the costs. a particularly relevant advantage for using the network scale up method for national surveys of human trafficking is its ability to ask about several sub populations in one survey. for example if both men and women are traf ficked in a given country but for different reasons questions could be asked about women trafficked for the purpose of sexual exploitation men trafficked inner e ck hk.indd proposed utilization of the method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons for the purpose of forced labour and persons who may be vulnerable to such trafficking such as sex workers or day labourers. finally using the network scale up method does not require researchers to find victims of such trafficking who may be inaccessible for a number or rea sons or who may themselves obfuscate their situation out of fear. researchers must also be mindful of the fact that asking victims sensitive questions may put the victims at risk of becoming involved in other crime. specific recommendations on using the network scale up method for estimating the prevalence of trafficking in persons at the national level researchers using the network scale up method to estimate the prevalence of trafficking in persons at the national level should a conduct in depth interviews with a number of victims or family members of victims to understand the dynamics of information transmission to the family and community from the victim. who would they tell or not tell about their circum stances when did they become fully aware of the situation and when did their families and community become aware for example do all men traf ficked for the purpose of forced labour tell their wives of their circumstances right away or do they wait until they see them in person to reveal the truth there are examples of studies using the network scale up method where this type of formative research on transmission error improved estimates considerably b consider adding a module to evaluate the stigma associated with each type of exploitation. for example in a study of key affected populations in china respondents were asked to rank their respect for each type of popula tion men who have sex with men injection drug users etc. from very low to very high . this approach was then used to weight the responses with the assumption that those with a neutral opinion were less likely to underreport or overreport than those with a non neutral opinion c whenever possible use multiple methods to estimate the number of victims of trafficking in persons in the same place to validate network scale up method against other indirect estimation techniques e.g. the network scale up method along side multiplier methods or the capture recapture method . this approach and the publication of this approach will help to move forward research in this field and to identify the most effective techniques in each circumstance. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume references . international labour organization ilo global estimate of forced labour results and methodology geneva international labour office . . united nations treaty series vol. no. . . h. russell bernard and others counting hard to count populations the net work scale up method for public health sex transmitted infections vol. no. suppl. pp. ii ii . . peter d. killworth and others estimation of seroprevalence rape and home lessness in the united states using a social network approach evaluation review vol. no. pp. . . charles kadushin and others scale up methods as applied to estimates of heroin use journal of drug issues vol. no. pp. . . volodymyr paniotto and others estimating the size of populations with high risk for hiv using the network scale up method analytical report kiev interna tional institute of sociology . . matthew j. salganik and others assessing network scale up estimates for groups most at risk of hiv aids evidence from a multiple method study of heavy drug users in curitiba brazil vol. no. pp. . . wei guo and others estimating the size of hiv key affected populations in chongqing china using the network scale up method plos one vol. no. . . mostafa shokoohi mohammad r. baneshi and ali akbar haghdoost size estimation of groups at high risk of hiv aids using network scale up in kerman iran international journal of preventive medicine vol. no. pp. . . satoshi ezoe and others population size estimation of men who have sex with men through the network scale up method in japan plos one vol. no. . . tyler h. mccormick matthew j. salganik and tian zhen how many people do you know efficiently estimating personal network size journal of the american statistical association vol. no. pp. . . robert m. groves survey errors and survey costs new york john wiley and sons . . tyler h. mccormick and tian zheng latent demographic profile estimation in hard to reach groups the annals of applied statistics vol. no. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo mapping techniques by kelle barrick wayne j. pitts joseph p. mcmichael william d. wheaton and brian m. evans abstract given the hidden nature of trafficking in labourers it is inherently difficult to research. although identifying victims who are currently being exploited may be the most effective mechanism for generating estimates of the prevalence of trafficking most research on trafficking in labourers has focused on cases known to law enforcement or service providers. to overcome this obstacle and generate a prevalence estimate of trafficking in persons for the purpose of agricultural labour a sampling frame of potential victims needs to be con structed. this article contains a description of an innovative technique for developing a sampling frame of migrant farmworkers using geographical data on farming practices to identify where workers may live and employing mobile devices to capture digital images and global positioning system coordinates to serve as a surrogate for a household s address or description with tradi tional field enumeration. results of a pilot test demonstrate the feasibility and efficiency of developing a sampling frame using this technique. keywords labour trafficking migrant farmworkers hidden populations sampling background human trafficking is a global problem of unknown numbers and unsubstanti ated estimates. among known human trafficking cases nearly per cent have been cases trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation. however it is sus pected that trafficking in labourers is under identified. it is incumbent on researchers to develop valid and reliable estimates of the magnitude of the problem in order to ensure that appropriate actions are taken by law enforce ment agencies and the criminal justice system as well as to inform the develop ment of empirically based mechanisms to prevent trafficking. however given the hidden nature of labour trafficking it is inherently difficult to research. it is rti international north carolina united states of america. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume not surprising then that most of the existing research on human trafficking has relied on surveys of law enforcement agencies and victim service providers about their experiences with trafficking cases and reviews of known cases. those cases are uncovered when an arrest occurs or the victim seeks services. however victims only rarely come to the attention of law enforcement or ser vice providers and when they do they may not be recognized as trafficking victims. labour trafficking hides within the confines of legitimate employment and law enforcement authorities have relatively little experience with such cases. moreover the victims who come forward or are otherwise found may not be representative of the entire victim population. thus looking for labour traf ficking cases solely in law enforcement and court files will likely result in the majority of labour trafficking incidents being overlooked. this makes it difficult to use standard statistical techniques such as applying a multiplier to the popu lation of known victims in order to estimate the true number and characteris tics of victims. although identifying victims who are currently being exploited may be the most effective mechanism for generating estimates of the prevalence of trafficking most research on labour trafficking has focused on cases known to law enforcement authorities . for a recent groundbreaking exception using respondent driven sampling see zhang . most cases of forced labour involve migrant workers in economic sectors where the share of labour in the cost of production is highest and a main determinant of competitiveness . one such sector is agriculture. there are more than . million farms in the united states of america and the market value of agricultural products sold in reached nearly billion . in the united states about . million labourers work on farms and ranches percent of whom are hired directly by the farm operators . north carolina is one of the leading agricultural states in the united states and it produces a variety of table crops that require extensive manual labour to grow and harvest. in north carolina had over farms yielding agri cultural products with a market value of over billion including . bil lion from crops . according to the north carolina farmworker institute about migrant farmworkers and their dependants work in north carolina the state with the sixth highest number of migrant farmworkers in the united states . the combination of a large agricultural industry and reliance on migrant workers makes north carolina an ideal location to study labour trafficking. in the authors completed a study that documented the characteristics and indicators of labour trafficking in north carolina . the study was funded by the national institute of justice the research development and eval uation agency of the united states department of justice . one component of this multimethod study was conducting interviews with migrant farmworkers inner e ck hk.indd developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo mapping techniques who may be at risk for exploitation and trafficking. to ensure a representative sample of the population of interest survey samples are typically drawn from a known population of eligible participants however there is no such sampling frame for migrant farmworkers. in the united states farms that employ agri cultural workers on a temporary visa are required to register other farms may rely on undocumented immigrants and would not be found on a farm registry. some advocacy organizations provide outreach services to workers living at some unregistered farms however their lists only include labour camps of which they are aware and the lists are admittedly incomplete. because a sam pling frame for migrant farmworkers does not exist the authors employed vari ous techniques for identifying and recruiting a convenience sample of respondents. this included reaching out to workers at farmworker festivals visiting labour camps identified through the state registry and outreach organi zations and reaching out to farmworkers at other public locations e.g. laundro mats launderettes stores frequented by spanish speaking customers and bus stations . those techniques enabled the authors to conduct in person inter views with farmworkers during a period of about six months in . the interview instrument covered the core measures of trafficking and other forms of labour exploitation that had been successfully used in a study of labour traf ficking in san diego california . the results of the study in north carolina revealed a high level of labour traffick ing per cent of respondents and other forms of labour exploitation that did not rise to the level of trafficking per cent . however because a conveni ence sample was used these findings may not be representative of all migrant farmworkers in north carolina. to overcome this obstacle and generate an esti mate of the prevalence of labour trafficking among all migrant farmworkers in the state a sampling frame of migrant farmworkers would have to be developed. in the authors successfully piloted a method that relies on innovative geo mapping techniques to identify farmworker dwellings. the authors are in the process of applying this technique to enumerate farmworker dwellings through out north carolina. a sample of dwellings will be drawn from this frame and used to recruit a representative sample of migrant farmworkers for participation in interviews about labour trafficking and exploitation. the strategy for establish ing a sampling frame of migrant farmworkers as well as the results of the pilot project demonstrating its feasibility in the field is described below. research objectives the current study seeks to achieve three primary objectives. first a field tested enumeration strategy will be applied to establish a sampling frame of migrant farmworkers. this sampling frame will support the use of multistage sampling inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume procedures and yield a representative sample of migrant farmworkers in north carolina. second a sample of migrant farmworkers will be interviewed in order to produce reliable estimates of the prevalence of labour trafficking victimization among farmworkers in north carolina. the authors will adopt the core measures that were successfully used in the san diego study and in their own earlier study in north carolina . in addition to estimating prev alence the authors will be able to produce social and demographic profiles of identified victims. third the authors will investigate the severity and types of victimization that migrant farmworkers endure. the results will inform law enforcement agencies and policymakers about the scale and scope of trafficking among migrant farmworkers and will result in recommendations for potentially effective strategies to combat and prevent trafficking. methods the methods described below are limited primarily to the innovative process currently being applied to generate a representative sample of farmworker dwellings across north carolina. the primary steps for developing the sam pling frame of migrant farmworkers and selecting a representative sample include using data on agricultural practices to select geographical segments to include in the sample enumerating all dwellings in the selected segments selecting dwellings to include in the household survey validating the eligibil ity of dwellings and selecting individuals within a household to participate. results from a pilot study using methods similar to those described here will be presented to demonstrate the feasibility of the sampling and data collection strategies. because the collection of data has not begun prevalence estimates for trafficking are not yet available. geographical sample selection the first step in generating the sampling frame is to identify where farmwork ers may live. resting on the assumption that migrant farmworkers live near the farms on which they work an effort was made to identify areas in north carolina where crops are grown. because much of the farming in the united states is highly mechanized and does not require much manual labour e.g. field corn and soybeans the authors have focused on high labour labour intensive crops e.g. apples cucumbers strawberries tobacco tomatoes and the strategies used in the pilot study have been refined and technological improvements have been made. these changes are expected to result in improved ability to identify and validate farmworker dwellings in addition to easing the enumeration and interview process. inner e ck hk.indd developing a sampling frame of potential traffi cking victims using geo mapping techniques watermelon . the united states department of agriculture maintains those data at the census block level. the map shows the distribution of high labour crops across north carolina. the map indicates that those crops are produced in various clusters within the state and are not evenly distributed. this information is useful as it makes it possible to eliminate large areas in the state in which migrant farmworkers are not expected to be found because no high labour crops are produced in those areas. spatial aggregation techniques will be used to divide north carolina into geographical segments by joining adjacent census blocks to create areas of a size that makes fi eld enumeration feasible. the geographical segments will then be aggregated into larger units that will serve as the primary sampling units which will cluster the sites reducing travel and making enumeration and data collection less time consuming and more cost effi cient. probability propor tional to size sampling will be used with land area for high labour crops as the measure of size to select primary sampling units. from within each of the primary sampling units probability proportional to size sampling will again be used to select segments within each primary sampling unit. field staff will then be dispatched to each selected segment to create a list of dwelling units. figure i. distribution of high labour crops in north carolina a census block is a statistical area bounded by visible features e.g. streets streams railroad tracks and non visible boundaries e.g. property lines city limits . census blocks are small in area but may be large or irregularly shaped in rural areas. the united states census bureau distinguishes between census tracts block groups and blocks. census block groups are smaller than census tracts and can be further divided into census blocks for understanding locations at the lowest aggregate level. in the census north carolina had tracts block groups and blocks www.census.gov . areas of high labour farmland inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume enumeration of dwellings the authors developed a method of field enumeration that employs the cap ture of digital images with global positioning system gps coordinates. in short field staff are deployed to the geographical areas of interest drive all roads paved and unpaved and photograph each dwelling they pass. com bined the digital image and gps coordinates serve as a surrogate to what would be a household s address or description with traditional field enumera tion. this method was introduced in the summer of for an in person household survey for which a suitable frame could not be generated by tradi tional techniques such as address based sampling traditional field enumera tion or random digit dialling . two survey methodologists were deployed to the field and enumerated the entire target household population approxi mately dwelling units in five days. this method is being updated and adapted for the current project. when it was used for the first time the method relied on the use of a particular camera with a gps receiver to capture photographs of dwellings and gps coordinates. paper maps were developed for the target area and were used to aid in navigation. however advances in technology allow for a simpler more user friendly system that will operate entirely on an android tablet. the authors also developed a mobile application for spatial field data col lection that will serve as the navigation system as well as the gps enabled camera. the application does not require a live internet connection which makes it particularly useful in rural areas where there may not be consist ent cellular service. this application connects with geographic informa tion system gis web services to download customer map layers and transmit map markups back to the servers. in addition to photographing the dwelling the application will also make it possible to record a code indicating the likelihood that a dwelling is a farmworker dwelling the likelihood being high code medium code or low code . the mapping application will have three buttons one for each likelihood code when one of the buttons is clicked it will take a photograph of a dwelling and record the code indicating the likelihood of the dwelling being a farm worker dwelling. the field team will determine which likelihood code is to be given to a dwell ing. the decision will be based on a protocol that describes observations indi cating that a dwelling may be a farmworker dwelling. the observation list includes community dwelling resident and vehicle indicators. the protocol was initially developed by a member of the research team who has experience engaging in migrant farmworker outreach and was subsequently reviewed by inner e ck hk.indd developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo mapping techniques local farmworker advocates. a team of enumerators will be trained on the protocol both in a classroom setting and in the field to ensure that they inter pret it as intended. teams consisting of one driver and one navigator photo grapher will be dispatched to each segment selected on the basis of the geographical distribution of high labour crops. the photographs and geo graphical coordinates will be downloaded from the tablet and will serve as the sampling frame. validation and selection of eligible dwellings and respondents once the sampling frame has been established a sample of dwellings will be selected for approaching and recruiting respondents to participate in in person interviews. because relatively few dwellings are expected to be given the code indicating a high likelihood of being the housing of migrant farm workers all such dwellings will be visited to attempt an interview. a large proportion of those dwellings given the code for medium likelihood and a small proportion of those given the code for low likelihood will also be visited. the proportion of dwellings within each of these strata to be selected will be determined after reviewing characteristics of the entire sampling frame. after selecting the dwellings efforts will focus on validating whether the coding decision was correct and identifying eligible respondents to recruit for par ticipation in the interview. interviewers will make at least three attempts to make contact with residents at each selected dwelling. visits will be made on different days of the week and at different times of the day to increase the likelihood of the dwellings being occupied. the interviewers will first confirm that the dwelling is occupied by migrant farmworkers. if multiple residents are eligible to participate in the interviews one will be randomly selected. the respondents will be read a description of the study and what participation in the study entails. if they agree to participate the interviewer will begin conducting the interview. the interview instrument will contain the core items from the san diego labour trafficking study and will be used to estimate the prevalence of labour traf ficking among migrant farmworkers in north carolina. although this protocol was developed for a specific geographical and industrial setting it is adaptable to other regions countries and industries. in this part of the process the key is the reliance on experts to ensure that the protocol used to identify the population of interest is accurate and inclusive. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume research team and other resources needed completing the data collection and analysis requires a strong team with expertise and research experience in the field of trafficking in persons and in sampling hidden populations sampling statistics and weights gis analy sis data analysis and bilingual bicultural field interviewing. a principal investigator and a co investigator will be responsible for the design and exe cution of the study instrumentation implementation and other administra tive activities. both have experience conducting research with migrant workers who are at risk of being victims of labour trafficking. a sampling statistician is systematically developing the geographical segments ran domly selecting segments for inclusion in the study and generating weights for use in the data analysis. the sampling statistician works closely with a gis analyst and a senior gis expert who are extracting the geographical data making programing adjustments to the mobile application as needed to meet project requirements and conducting all other mapping activities. additionally an experienced data collection task leader will be responsible for executing all fielding activities as designed and planned including coor dinating and supervising the daily activities of field teams. the task leader will be supported by field supervisors who will lead teams of field enumera tors and interviewers. finally a team of field staff will conduct the enumera tion and conduct interviews with the selected participants. all field interviewers will be bilingual most interviews will be conducted in spanish. the enumeration and interview teams will each consist of two or three staff members. the number of teams will depend on the geographical distribu tion of the selected segments and the time available for conducting inter views. if the selected segments are clustered in a few areas in the state it may be feasible for one team to conduct the entire enumeration however if the segments are dispersed more evenly throughout the state then two or three teams may be needed to cover the state in a timely fashion. the same logic holds for the sample of dwellings that will be selected for interviews greater dispersion of dwellings may require additional teams. in addition to the research team this type of data collection effort requires some special equipment and software. given the rural nature of the areas of interest small sports utility vehicles will be rented for the fieldwork so that the team can easily access unpaved roads. each field team will also need a tablet that is equipped with the mobile mapping application. the research team will also need access to other mapping and statistical analysis software. the final resource required is time. this project is expected to be completed in a total of three years. the first three months of the project are dedicated to getting the project set up which includes finalizing instrumentation developing field inner e ck hk.indd developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo mapping techniques protocols and obtaining approval from the institutional review boards to conduct research with human subjects. all field staff will also undergo intensive training on interviewing techniques field protocols and procedures for the protection of human subjects before data collection may begin. the enumeration will be con ducted in year and is expected to be completed in less than one month. field staff will conduct interviews with eligible migrant farmworkers during the grow ing season approximately from may to november of years and . the goal will be to complete interviews in two years averaging about interviews each year. data analysis and reporting will occur in year . challenges faced in the pilot study a few challenges were faced in piloting the enumeration strategy for migrant farmworkers and plans are in place to mitigate these as the method is applied state wide. one of the initial challenges in the process is assessing the likeli hood that a dwelling is inhabited by migrant farmworkers. in the interest of time these assessments must be made fairly quickly by the members of the field team while they are driving and photographing the dwelling. because the assessments are used to determine the probability that a dwelling will be revisited for validation and interviewing it is important to err on the side of assuming that a dwelling is more rather than less likely to house migrant farmworkers. at this stage it is better to be more inclusive and eliminate ineli gible dwellings during the validation process than to exclude a dwelling that may be eligible. developing the protocol for determining the likelihood that a dwelling unit may be inhabited by farmworkers and providing adequate train ing to field staff are critical in this process. there were some logistical issues with planning the most efficient driving route for enumerating a segment and validating whether each dwelling is eligible. in rural areas census block boundaries frequently follow rivers levees ditches or other geographical features that are not directly accessible by road. in these situ ations it is necessary to exit a segment and re enter at another point that is acces sible by road. enumerating every dwelling in a selected segment may require driving on the same roads repeatedly and backtracking to ensure that all small roads and unpaved roads are included. this can be mitigated by more thorough pre planning of routes by the field team. additionally because residents are not always at home it is necessary to make multiple visits to some dwellings in order to validate whether they are farmworker dwellings. plans have been made to con duct most of the validation interview visits in the early evening and on weekends when farmworkers are most likely to be at home. however the working hours are often long and farmworkers may work on weekends as well. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume finally conducting the enumeration may generate some negative attention as some residents may want to know why people are driving around photographing houses. the enumeration team members must drive slowly in order to photo graph each dwelling and make a determination about the likelihood that it is a farmworker dwelling. they also must backtrack and drive the same roads repeat edly to capture the entire segment. this increases the likelihood that residents will notice them and become concerned. the key to overcoming this challenge is to train the enumeration team members to expect questions about their presence and be prepared to explain their presence and their role in the research project. main results of the pilot study the authors conducted a pilot study of this approach early in . the pur pose of the pilot study was to determine whether it was feasible to enumerate dwellings in a timely fashion whether the predictions regarding the likelihood of a dwelling being a migrant farmworker dwelling were accurate and whether it was a less time consuming and more cost effective approach to developing a sampling frame. clusters of census blocks with large areas of high labour crops were purposefully selected for inclusion in the pilot study. the authors enumerated dwellings in four counties of north carolina. each dwelling was assigned a code indicating its likelihood of being a farm worker dwelling almost certainly very likely somewhat likely or not likely . most per cent of the dwellings were not expected to be farm worker dwellings only per cent were predicted to be very likely or almost certainly a migrant farmworker dwelling see table . return trips were attempted to verify whether the coding was accurate. table . field predictions about the likelihood of a dwelling being migrant farmworker dwelling percentage almost certainly eligible very likely eligible somewhat likely eligible not likely eligible after the dwellings were enumerated the authors returned to each of the dwellings that had been initially coded as almost certainly very likely or somewhat likely to be a migrant farmworker dwelling and to a sample of per cent of the dwellings that had been assessed as not likely to be inner e ck hk.indd developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo mapping techniques migrant farmworker dwellings. the authors then attempted to verify the orig inal prediction by visiting each dwelling and asking some basic screening questions to confirm that the dwelling was the primary place where a migrant farmworker stayed during non working hours. as shown in table the validation results suggest that it was easier to identify ineligible than eligible dwellings this is desirable as it means that the authors will be able to eliminate ineligible dwellings during the validation process and can be more confident that all eligible dwellings are included. it was deter mined that of the dwellings coded as not likely to be farmworker dwell ings were not farmworker dwellings actually was a farmworker dwelling and was undetermined . only per cent of the dwellings very likely and per cent of those almost certainly to be farmworker dwellings were con firmed as farmworker dwellings. the results also suggest that only a small sam ple of houses given the code indicating a low likelihood of being farmworker dwellings need to be sampled in the full study. there was also a relatively high proportion of dwellings for which a determination about eligibility was not made. this occurred because residents were not at home during the validation visits. the inability to make a determination about some dwellings contributed to the low confirmation rates per cent of the dwellings coded as being very likely and per cent of those coded as being almost certainly farmworker dwellings were undetermined . this underscores the need to plan for multiple return trips to selected segments in order to increase the chances of visiting dwellings at a time when the residents are at home. it is anticipated that most of this work will occur in the early evening and on weekends. table . verification of the predictions about the likelihood of a dwelling being a migrant farmworker dwelling number of dwellings sampled prediction confirmed prediction not confirmed undetermined f f percentage f percentage f percentage almost certainly eligible . . . very likely eligible . . . might be eligible . . . not eligible . . . total . . . a dwelling was considered undetermined if it was unoccupied during the follow up visits and the presence of migrant farmworkers could not be determined. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume conclusion overall the pilot results demonstrate the feasibility of developing a sampling frame of the migrant farmworker population using geographical data on agri cultural practices and the newly developed enumeration technique. several advantages and disadvantages of this approach are described below. advantages of the approach one advantage of this approach is it enables researchers to identify victims who are currently being exploited rather than relying on databases of cases known to law enforcement agencies or service providers. trafficking cases are under iden tified and underreported which reduces the value of extracting secondary data on the few cases that come to light in order to estimate the magnitude of the problem. this is more problematic among victims of labour trafficking than among victims of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation as labourers are less likely to come in contact with law enforcement authorities in the course of their daily activities than are victims of sex trafficking. because victims are rarely identified by law enforcement or service providers they are probably not representative of the entire victim population. research relying on such data will overlook most trafficking incidents and run the risk of drawing incorrect assumptions about the size or characteristics of the victim population. the primary advantage of this strategy over other methods that seek to identify hidden populations is that it allows for the recruitment of physically and socially isolated populations that may not be reachable through other techniques. for example respondent driven sampling has been successfully used to estimate the prevalence of labour trafficking among undocumented workers in san diego however it is best suited for use in smaller geographical areas and may not be feasible for nationwide prevalence estimates. moreover because it relies heavily on the subjects immediate social networks it is difficult to use with populations that are socially isolated. the approach presented in this arti cle relies on the geographical location of worksites rather than on immediate social networks and thus may identify individuals with little or no opportunities to socialize with friends and family outside of the work environment. there are also advantages gained by using geographical data on farming prac tices in the sample selection process. a straightforward alternative to the police officers routinely handle vice cases and may initially arrest a sex trafficking victim who was misidentified as a prostitute victimization may be uncovered after the original arrest. however labour trafficking does not have an analogous criminal activity i.e. work in jobs that may result in exploitation is legal making it even more difficult to identify the victims of such trafficking. inner e ck hk.indd developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo mapping techniques approach presented in this article would be to randomly select census blocks for inclusion in the sample. however using data on crop location improves the efficiency of using geographical sampling techniques by eliminating areas that are unlikely to include the population of interest. it also improves the precision of prevalence estimates over simple random sampling. this approach also makes use of technological innovations e.g. android based tablet mobile mapping application that result in time and cost savings in developing the sampling frame and in conducting the interviews. although the focus of the current study is labour trafficking among migrant farmworkers in the united states this framework is flexible and adaptable to dif ferent countries industries forms of trafficking and hidden populations. the pri mary requirement is the existence of geographical data that can be used to narrow down where the population of interest may work or live. the case of migrant farm workers can be viewed as an example of how the strategy may be used in the field. disadvantages of the approach although this enumeration strategy has proved useful in examining traffick ing among migrant farmworkers it has a few limitations. one of its primary disadvantages involves its reliance on geographical information about the industry it is most useful when geographical characteristics can be used to narrow down where the population of interest works and lives. this approach also assumes that farmworkers live near the farms on which they work thus excluding those who may live further away and commute to work. although the approach has proved useful in identifying potential trafficking victims in the agricultural sector it may not be particularly useful in identifying victims in other industries that are less geographically clustered such as construction landscaping and domestic help. it is also limited to examining one specific industry at a time the geographical indicators for agriculture will be quite different from those for mining or fishing. other techniques such as respondent driven sampling may be more effective when the research focuses on a broader population e.g. experiences of all undocumented migrant workers . another potential disadvantage of this approach relates to the amount of travel that may be needed to develop the sampling frame and conduct return trips to validate the dwelling type and conduct interviews. in this approach unlike the situation in other approaches the interviews are not scheduled in advance and are not conducted in one location. instead the respondents are spread across an entire state and the field interviewer must identify and recruit each respondent and conduct the interview during a short period in which the respondent is available. although this can be labour intensive the amount of travel required will depend on both the geographical size of the area and the ability to identify and recruit inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume respondents outside of working hours. proper planning for best days and times to conduct fieldwork should help reduce the number of trips to an area that are needed to recruit respondents and conduct interviews. in relatively small geo graphical areas such as a city this should not pose a problem. however generat ing prevalence estimates for larger areas such as an entire state or country requires more time and money to meet travel related costs . however this may be mitigated through the use of online mapping services or similar software to virtually drive through the selected segments to identify best driving routes and potentially eliminate some areas prior to fieldwork. these tools could be used to identify areas with no dwellings or high income subdivisions that would be coded as highly unlikely . references . heather j. clawson nicole dutch and megan cummings law enforcement responses to human trafficking and the implications for victims current practices and les sons learned fairfax virginia caliber and icf international . . heather j. clawson and others prosecuting human trafficking cases lessons learned and promising practices fairfax virginia icf international . . amy farrell jack mcdevitt and stephanie fahy understanding and improving law enforcement responses to human trafficking final report boston institute on race and justice northeastern university . . phyllis j. newton timothy m. mulcahy and susan e. martin finding victims of human trafficking national opinion research center university of chicago . . sheldon x. zhang looking for a hidden population trafficking of migrant labourers in san diego county san diego california san diego state university . . patrick belser forced labour and human trafficking estimating the profits working paper no. geneva international labour office march . . united states department of agriculture census of agriculture preliminary report washington d.c. national agricultural statistics service . . north carolina farmworker institute introduction to farm work . available at www.ncfarmworkers.org . . kelle barrick and others indicators of labor trafficking among north carolina migrant farmworkers final report research report prepared for the national institute of justice of the united states department of justice washington d.c. august . . joseph p. mcmichael and others geoframe a technological advancement in field enumeration presentation made at the joint statistical meetings denver colo rado august . inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology with a discussion of the international labour organization s global estimate of forced labour by peter g.m. van der heijden ieke de vries dankmar b hning and maarten cruyff abstract the authors present an overview of capture recapture methodology and the multiplier method so that researchers interested in estimating the size and characteristics of a population in the area of trafficking in persons can have an idea of how to approach this problem and what the advantages and draw backs of this methodology are. the methodology can be used for the produc tion of local estimates as well as national or global estimates. suggestions are made for improving the international labour organization s global estimate of forced labour. keywords capture recapture population size estimation multiplier method hard to reach populations trafficking in persons forced labour homeless domestic violence introduction several major international institutions recognize the importance of knowledge on the scale and nature of human trafficking and rely on international statistics on human trafficking to describe the practice . however there still is a scarcity of knowledge on the total scale of human trafficking. existing estimates on the magnitude of human trafficking have been criticized for being based on false or unfounded assumptions or for being inaccurate because of insufficient the views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the policies of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children. utrecht university the netherlands and university of southampton united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland. researcher at the office of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children the hague the netherlands. university of southampton united kingdom. utrecht university the netherlands. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume and unreliable data and inadequate use of methodologies . estimating the total scale of human trafficking is a challenging task. among the multitude of challenges in producing estimates one challenge that is related to definitional ambiguity stands out. despite the internationally accepted legal definition of trafficking in persons established in the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against trans national organized crime in practice there are a variety of interpreta tions of what constitutes human trafficking. definitional ambiguity plagues discussions in research on human trafficking are all researchers studying the same phenomenon the use of different interpretations of human trafficking can make statistical data incomparable and by extension complicates inter national comparative research based on such data. this challenge has been widely referred to in research on human trafficking p. p. pp. p. pp. . in this article the authors intend to contribute to a methodological discussion on how to obtain more accurate estimates in the area of human trafficking. knowledge on the magnitude of human trafficking is crucial for effective policymaking in terms of for example establishing government sponsored countermeasures planning and assessing anti trafficking initiatives both gov ernmental and nongovernmental and determining the most effective funds p. p. pp. and p. . yet inaccurate estimates may be misleading to anti trafficking efforts p. . the aim of this article is to give an overview of capture recapture applications so that researchers interested in estimating the size and characteristics of a population in the area of human trafficking can obtain an idea of how to approach this problem and what the advantages and drawbacks of this meth odology are. the people involved in human trafficking situations belong to a so called hard to reach population for which a reliable sampling frame is absent and this hampers representative sampling p. p. pp. p. p. . in this article methods are described see also the article by ieke de vries and corinne dettmeijer vermeulen in this volume of forum on crime and society. trafficking in persons shall mean the recruitment transportation transfer harbouring or receipt of persons by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion of abduction of fraud of deception of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation. exploitation shall include at a minimum the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation forced labour or services slavery or practices similar to slavery servitude or the removal of organs article . inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology that can be used to deal with this challenge. as an example another hard to reach population the homeless population of utrecht a city in the nether lands is discussed. three examples are given of how the population size can be estimated. first there is a discussion on a methodology that makes use of one single registration list . the authors recently carried out a study aimed at estimating the size of this population and its characteristics. data were col lected for two weeks in a shelter home. for each homeless person appearing in the shelter home during the two weeks the number of days he or she slept there were recorded. a total of homeless were observed in the shelter of whom slept there only once twice and so on. owing to the design of the study the homeless that did not appear in the shelter home in other words those who appeared zero times were missed. the problem was to estimate the number of homeless that appeared zero times. using methods discussed in more detail below in the section entitled capture recapture methodology using a single list it was estimated that an additional home less were part of the homeless population who did not sleep in the shelter home. this led to a population size estimate of with a per cent confi dence interval of . the second type of methodology which was not used for utrecht but for the netherlands as a whole makes use of multiple registers. here three registers were used namely a register of persons who receive social benefits a police register and a register of drug users. in each of these registers it is indicated whether an individual is homeless or not. with three registers there are in principle combinations possible for an individual to be present or not in each of the registers and for each of these combinations the number of homeless can be counted. the cell that refers to the homeless persons who are absent in each of the three registers is empty as it is not known how many homeless are missed by each of the registers. however there are statistical models with which this number can be estimated and if there is an estimate of this number then it is possible to obtain an estimate of the population size by adding up the number of homeless who are seen at least once. the third type of methodology is called the multiplier method. there is a list of homeless persons who receive benefits there are say homeless per sons on the list. yet the number of homeless who do not receive benefits is not known. locations frequented by homeless persons such as shelter homes general practitioners offices and centres for drug users are visited and the homeless persons there are asked whether they receive benefits or not. if for example per cent of those homeless people say that they receive benefits and per cent do not then corresponds to these per cent and it fol lows that the estimate of homeless who do not receive benefits is thus the estimate of the size of the total population is . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume the capture recapture methodology is one of the viable methods that could be used for producing local estimates of human trafficking. the sections that follow contain descriptions of how the capture recapture methodology can be applied by using multiple sources by using a single list and by using the so called multiplier method. then there is a section containing a discussion of how the international labour organization ilo applied the capture recapture methodology in order to reach a global estimate of the total num ber of victims of forced labour. some suggestions for improving the ilo estimate are provided. the last section in the article contains some practical notes for applying the capture recapture methodology in research on human trafficking. capture recapture methodology using multiple sources a well known method for estimating the population size of human populations makes use of linked lists of individuals. the following is a hypothetical example involving prostitutes in a big city in the month of january the police went to the prostitution areas in the city and they registered prostitutes. in the same month public health officials kept a register of the prostitutes who were treated and they registered prostitutes. using official papers names dates of birth and so on it was possible to find an overlap of prostitutes. that would then yield the data shown in table . table . hypothetical example showing observed numbers of prostitutes registered by police and public health officials registered by public health officials registered by police yes no total yes no total ilo estimated that there were . million victims of forced labour at any given moment in the period with a confidence interval of per cent p. . note that this hypothetical example does not necessarily refer to human trafficking. in some countries e.g. the netherlands prostitution is not always considered to be human trafficking. in other countries moral attitudes dictate that prostitution is by definition regarded as human trafficking. regardless of the discussion on whether there is a causal link between the prostitution policy and the magnitude of human trafficking the different interpretations of what constitutes human trafficking need to be taken into account when measuring the magnitude of the practice see the report of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children p. see also the article by ieke de vries and corinne dettmeijer vermeulen in this volume of forum on crime and society inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology thus a total of prostitutes were registered. the problem is to estimate the unknown number of prostitutes those missed by the police and by the public health officials. this unknown number refers to the empty no no cell in table . if this number is estimated then adding the estimate to the observed number of prostitutes will yield an estimate of the size of the population of prostitutes in the city in january . a standard approach to making such an estimate is to assume that for the pros titutes in the police register and for the prostitutes not in the police register the proportions seen by the public health officers are identical. in other words in both the yes row and the no row of table this proportion is . . for the yes row this proportion is derived from . for the no row there is only the numerator and it follows that the denominator should be as . . the missing number in the table for the empty no no cell is and this yields a population size estimate of see table . for more examples see bishop fienberg and holland international working group for disease monitoring and forecasting chao and others and van der heijden and others . table . hypothetical example showing observed and estimated numbers of prostitutes registered by police and public health officials registered by public health officials registered by police yes no total yes no total note estimated numbers are in italics. data are hypothetical. the assumptions of this estimation procedure are discussed in some detail below. independence of inclusion probabilities a first assumption is that the inclusion probability of one list is statistically independent from the inclusion probability of the other list. for table the estimated inclusion probabilities are . for the police register and . for the public health register. in human populations independence of inclusion probabilities is often unlikely. typically in popula tion size estimation it is likely that some humans are more visible than others and therefore the more visible humans will have higher inclusion probabilities in both registers and the less visible humans will have lower inclusion proba bilities. an example of this is given below. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume table . hypothetical example showing observed numbers of prostitutes registered by police and public health officials subdivided into more and less visible prostitutes more visible prostitutes registered by public health officials registered by police yes no total yes no total less visible prostitutes registered by police yes no total yes no total note estimated numbers are in italics. data are hypothetical. whereas in tables and the inclusion probabilities are . and . in table the more visible prostitutes have inclusion probabilities . police and . public health officials for the less visible prosti tutes the inclusion probabilities are . police and . public health officials . the observed numbers in table add up to the observed numbers in table but the estimated numbers do not add up in table by assuming independence of the inclusion probabilities it is estimated that only more visible prostitutes were missed by both the police and the public health officials whereas fewer visible prostitutes are missed. these two numbers add up to an estimated number of whereas in table it is estimated that only prostitutes were missed by both registers. this shows what happens under violation of the assumption of independence of inclusion probabilities when the inclusion probabilities are positively related then if information on visibility is not used the estimate in table will be too low i.e. in table it is but it should have been . when the inclusion probabilities are negatively related then the estimate in table will be too high. inclusion probabilities can also be negatively related. consider again the home less as a hard to reach population. assume that there are two locations in a city where they can sleep. then some homeless may have a preference for being at the first location so the inclusion probability is higher for location and lower for location whereas other homeless persons may have a preference for being at the second location. this independence assumption is sometimes misunderstood it appears that sometimes people think that the independence assumption for the inclusion inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology probabilities is fulfilled if the lists are constructed independently for example because they are constructed by different organizations or groups of people. however the independence assumption refers to independence of inclusion probabilities not the independent construction of lists. it is clear that the independence assumption is restrictive and violation of the assumption may result in a large bias for sensitivity analyses to quantify this bias see gerritse van der heijden and bakker . one way to get around this independence assumption is by including a third list. so called loglinear models may be used that allow for pairwise dependence of lists and the remaining assumption is that there is no so called three factor interaction. an example of three factor interaction is that the relation between a pair of lists is different for those who are included in the third list compared with those who are not included in the third list. however it regularly happens that it is impossible to find a third list that can be linked to two other lists. homogeneity of inclusion probabilities it is often stated that an assumption underlying the calculation in table is that each of the inclusion probabilities is homogeneous that is the individu als have the same inclusion probability for the first list and the individuals have the same inclusion probability for the second list. however this state ment is incorrect and the actual assumption made is much less restrictive. consider the following three situations a if there is a covariate that is related to the inclusion probabilities to be on one list i.e. for list one the inclusion probabilities are not homogene ous but and also related to the inclusion probabilities on the other list this covariate does influence the population size estimate. an example was pro vided for table where visibility was related both to the inclusion probabili ties of the police register and to the list generated by the public health officials b however if there is a covariate that is related to the inclusion proba bilities to be on one list but not to the inclusion probabilities on the other this as an example in a recent ilo report there are two teams of people collecting reported cases of forced labour. it would be incorrect to assume that inclusion probabilities for the two lists generated by each of the teams are statistically independent. see for example a recent ilo report p. according to this model a forced labour report is either captured or not captured by a given team with respective probabilities p and p. the values of p are the same for all reports but may differ between the teams say p p for team and p p for team . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume covariate does not influence the population size estimate see chao and others van der heijden and others and zwane van der pal de bruin and van der heijden c if there are two covariates where one is related to the inclusion probability to be on the first list and the second is related to the inclusion probability to be on the second list yet the two covariates are statistically independent then these covariates do not influence the population size esti mate see van der heijden and others . even though the homogeneity assumption is more complicated than simply saying that inclusion probabilities should be homogeneous ignoring the het erogeneity in the first situation may lead to serious errors in the population size estimate as seen in table . however errors like these can be circum vented by including such covariates into the calculations. this can be done by making use of so called loglinear models see for example bishop fienberg and holland international working group for disease monitoring and forecasting and van der heijden and others . in fact a basic exam ple is shown in table where the covariate visibility can be included into the model by simply making separate calculations for more and less visible pros titutes and then adding the estimated numbers. the population is closed a further assumption is that the population is closed. closeness means that there are no individuals entering or leaving the population. there are models proposed for open populations but these models need much more detailed data than the data that are discussed here see the cormack jolly seber model described in pledger pollock and norris . if openness of the population may be a problem the extent of this problem can be lowered by limiting the period of observation. in a shorter period there will be fewer individuals entering or leaving the population than in a larger period. for example for studies on homelessness see the introduc tion of this article the homeless are only observed for a period of two weeks because over a longer period new homeless persons may enter the homeless population or some homeless persons may find a home or leave the region thereby leaving the population. however the cost of choosing a shorter period of observation is that the overlap between lists will become smaller which will yield population size estimates that have relatively larger confidence intervals. inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology correct linkage a last assumption is that it is possible to link two lists correctly that there are no missed links or incorrect links. in table one missed link would have changed the counts and and the estimated to and and an estimated . so for this example one missed link would lead to an increase of in the population size. if a similar calculation is made for an incorrect link then the counts would become and and an esti mated leading to a decrease of . much more about linking and space limitations can be found by searching in the literature under the term record linkage see also herzog scheuren and winkler . some design considerations there are a few design issues that may be taken into account when setting up a population size estimation study along the lines of linking two or more data sources a if possible strive for using more than two lists. the reason is that under two lists the unrealistic assumption has to be made that inclusion in one list is independent of inclusion in another list and in human popula tions this is a heroic assumption b if possible include covariates in the analysis in particular covari ates that are related to inclusion probabilities. even though technically the assumption is a complicated one as discussed above it is clear that in general by including covariates the model allows for heterogeneity of inclusion proba bilities and this makes the model and the resulting estimates more realistic c if possible and relevant make the period of observation short so that the problem of an open population is smaller. strive for a balance because if the period is too short there will not be enough overlap between the lists and this will lead to relatively large confidence intervals. in other words it is a problem of bias versus variance d in record linking of individuals or cases if decisions have to be taken that may be partly incorrect create multiple data sets that reflect differ ent decisions that could have been taken and analyse them separately. this will then show the sensitivity of the outcomes of the analysis for the choices that can be taken. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume a last suggestion is to consider whether it is necessary to make use of existing lists or whether it is possible to create lists. examples in the literature are esti mating the size of the web using lists created by search machines and searches for scientific literature to come to an estimate of the number of studies missed . this last option was also chosen by ilo which made use of two teams that each created a list of cases of trafficking in persons. capture recapture methodology using a single list the methodology presented in this section makes use of a single list. this list may be an existing register such as a police register or a register of homeless people or it may be data collected especially for the purpose of estimating the size and characteristics of a population as in the ilo report . estimation based on a single list may have important advantages first it does not require the unverifiable assumption that inclusion in one list is statistically independ ent from inclusion in the second list and second it does not require the elaborate process of database linkage that may be troubled by privacy regula tions. also there is not always sufficient reliable information to be certain that all linkages made are correct and that there are no linkages missed. a single list that contains re captures circumvents these problems. the methodology also has a drawback the assumptions that the models make are not always fulfilled see below . one example of a single list that can be used for population size estimation involves data on victims of domestic violence in the register system of the police in the netherlands. the police show every contact related to domes tic violence. thus a list of victims can be constructed including a variable that denotes the number of times each victim was recorded in the police register system with values and so on. victims who did not have con tact with the police are not part of this victim based data set. yet if their number is estimated this would yield an estimate of the total number of victims of domestic violence for a review of the literature see van der heijden cruyff and b hning . the list of victims can be used for this purpose. some principles that play a role in such an estimation are dis cussed below. it is important to note that a single list may also be derived from a multiple list database. that is what happened in the ilo report that is discussed in more detail in a separate section below. consider table discussed in the previous section. if the researcher ignores in which register a case has been found then there are cases seen in only one list and cases seen in two lists. inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology thus a list of cases can be set up where every case has a count of or depending on how many of the two original lists the case has been seen. for table these numbers would be seen once and seen twice . poisson distribution in the example of victims of domestic violence the aim is to estimate the number of victims who never came in contact with the police using the data about victims who saw the police at least once. these estimates are derived using poisson distributions. the poisson distribution is characterized by a poisson parameter denoted by . the parameter expresses the probability of a given number of events i.e. the count under two assumptions a that events occur with an average rate in a fixed interval of time b that events occur independently of the time since the last event. the probability that count y generated by a poisson distribution with poisson parameter is equal to j j is two arbitrary examples of a poisson distribution are provided in table . in the first example an individual has a poisson parameter . . then the probability of the individual being seen zero times is . being seen once is . being seen twice is . and so on. these probabilities add up to see table row . in the second example it is assumed that there is an indi vidual with poisson parameter . the probability of that individual not being seen is . the probability of him or her being seen once is . being seen twice is . and so on see table row . note that the indi vidual with poisson parameter has a larger probability of being seen at least once namely . . whereas the probability of the indi vidual with poisson parameter . being seen is only . . . it follows that the individual with poisson parameter has a larger prob ability of being seen. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume table . two examples of poisson distributions rows and and their corresponding truncated poisson distributions rows and number of times an individual is seen row poisson parameter total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . note the entries show the probability. how do these poisson distributions allow an estimate to be made of the size of the population assume that there is a count distribution with numbers of victims seen once seen twice and so on. there is no count for the number of victims seen zero times as this count is unknown and has to be estimated. this is called a truncated count distribution. a basic model is introduced that usually unrealistically assumes that all victims have the same poisson parameter and a truncated probability distribution is fitted to the truncated count distribution. examples of the truncated probability distributions for and . are shown in rows and of table . they are derived by dividing the probabilities in rows and of table by the probability of being seen at least once i.e. by . and by . . fitting a truncated poisson distribution to a truncated count distribution gives an estimated poisson parameter. as a hypothetical example assume that that there is a list of victims where f victims have been seen once f victims have been seen twice and f victims have been seen three times then the estimated pois son parameter will be approximately . the number of victims seen once twice and three times were generated by multiplying by the probability entries in row of table . when the poisson parameter is . the vic tims who have been seen correspond to . of the population see table row so approximately out of every victims in the population have been seen. this means that when victims have been seen the estimated total number of victims is . . thus an estimate can be made of the size of the population of victims. van der heijden and others discuss the assumption underlying the use of a poisson distribution to model human behaviour in some detail. to summarize inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology a a poisson distribution for an individual is reasonable if there is constant probability of an event e.g. a police contact occurring b an individual s count still follows a poisson distribution even if the individual s poisson parameter has changed during the period of observa tion. it follows for the type of applications being discussed that victims do not need to have a constant probability to see the police but it suffices if they can see the police a number of times. in this sense the use of a poisson distribu tion is not restrictive c one restrictive feature however is that the poisson assumption is only valid if a change in the individual poisson parameter of a victim is unrelated to any prior police contact or non contact. this assumption is vio lated if for example an event makes the next event more likely or less likely. for example a visit by the police may influence the behaviour of a perpetrator so that he or she becomes less violent but the victim may contact the police more easily after a first successful visit by the police d the assumption of a closed population has to be made. this assumption is usually tackled by observing events for a limited amount of time similar to the approach taken for multiple lists see the previous section of this article . extensions of the basic model so far the poisson distribution has been fitted to data assuming that all victims have an identical poisson parameter. this is referred to as the homogeneity assumption. in most applications where humans are involved this assumption is very unlikely to hold. for example some victims are expected to have higher probability resulting from higher poisson parameters of seeing the police than other victims. if this is the case there is heterogeneity of poisson parameters. if the poisson parameters are heterogeneous but this heterogeneity is ignored by fitting a homogeneous poisson model the estimated population size will be too low see van der heijden and others . there are two ways to take heterogeneity into account. one way is to include covariate information in the model such as age marital status and so on. this is done by using a regres sion model where the poisson parameter is a function of covariates. in the regression model the poisson parameters are still assumed to be homogene ous for individuals with identical values on the covariates but they are allowed to be heterogeneous for individuals with different values. since here the inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume differences in poisson parameters are determined by the observed covariates this is referred to as observed heterogeneity . the resulting model is known as the truncated poisson regression model . if in addition to observed heterogeneity there are differences in the poisson parameters that cannot be explained by the observed covariates referred to as unobserved heterogeneity then an extension of the truncated poisson regression model known as the truncated negative binomial regression model can be used . a second way to deal with heterogeneity is to use only the lower counts of the distribution. this approaches gives special emphasis to the number of victims seen once and twice. this approach is quite popular in estimates of drug using populations see van hest and others and it is also used in the ilo report . two attractive features of this approach are that heterogeneity of poisson parameters that is revealed in victims seen more than twice does not play a role in the estimation of the population size and thus it leads to estimates that are robust. a second important attractive feature of these mod els is that the victims missed i.e. the victims with a count of zero are likely to be more similar to the victims not often seen i.e. those seen once or twice than to the victims seen more than twice and therefore it makes sense to use only counts for victims seen once or twice. a first model that only makes use of the lower counts of a distribution is the model originally proposed by zelterman . he estimates the poisson parameter using only the first two frequencies f and f by this estimate of parameter can then be used to estimate the population size as nz n exp . this estimator is also mentioned in the ilo report p. . the authors have extended the zelterman estimator so that it can take covari ates into account . in this extension the estimated poisson parameter is a function of covariates. thus the resulting zelterman regression model is able to take observed heterogeneity into account that is present in victims with a count of or and it is robust against violations of the homogeneous poisson distributions in counts higher than . inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology a closely related estimator that is also used is the chao estimator nc n f f the chao estimator and the zelterman estimator are used for similar purposes. the chao estimator has the important property that if the data are generated by a homogeneous poisson distribution the estimator nc is unbiased but when there is heterogeneity then nc is to be interpreted as a lower bound for the population size. so for example if the chao estimator provides an estimate of then the population size will be larger than where the discrepancy will be larger under larger heterogeneity. also often the chao estimator and the zelterman estimator are very close although under certain circumstances the latter can experience strong overestimation bias . recently b hning and others extended the chao estimator so that it can take covariates into account. they show that as covariates take part of the heterogeneity into account the lower bound provided by the chao regression estimator will be higher than the lower bound when no covariates are taken into account. hence the lower bound will also get closer to the true population size. conclusion the methodology yields the following results a an estimated population size and a per cent confidence interval b an estimated number of unseen vic tims c if a regression model is used a distribution of this unseen number over covariates and d insight into which part of the estimated population size is visible in the register and which part is missed stratified by the levels of the covariates. there is a reasonable amount of experience with these models but their development is more recent than the models for multiple lists discussed in the previous section. as indicated above the chao estimator was used in the ilo study both the chao estimator and the zelterman estimator were used in hest and others . the authors of this article have made ample use of regression models in contract research for the government of the nether lands on subjects such as domestic violence using police data to estimate the number and characteristics of victims and perpetrators of domestic violence undocumented aliens using police data homeless persons using shelter data illegal gun ownership using police data drunk driving using police data and drug users using hospital data . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume multiplier method the multiplier method is another method used to estimate the size of a popu lation. it is closely related to capture recapture methodology that makes use of two lists see the section in this article entitled capture recapture meth odology using multiple sources . multiplier methods are user friendly known for their mathematical simplicity and the absence of linkage and their use is straightforward in the sense that calculations are easily made although it takes more time to derive the correct confidence interval of the estimate . at least two data sources are needed to use the multiplier method usually a comprehensive register that may already exist or is prepared specifically for the purpose of coming to a population size estimate and a survey. for example to estimate the number of undocumented prostitutes in a city it is assumed that the city has an official register of documented prostitutes working in the city and that the register lists prostitutes. it is also assumed that it is possible to take a random sample of the population of documented and undocumented prostitutes in the city. if the sample size is say and of the prostitutes in the sample are documented and are undocumented then the correspond with the prostitutes in the register and corre sponds to an unknown number u i.e. u. it follows that the esti mated number of undocumented prostitutes is . the estimated total number of prostitutes is then . so the idea of the multiplier method is that the number of prostitutes in the register is multiplied by the multiplier and this yields the number of undocumented prostitutes. table . hypothetical example showing the relation of the multiplier method with capture recapture methodology using two lists number in the sample number in the register yes no total yes no total note estimated numbers are in italics. the close relation with two source capture recapture methodology becomes apparent when the data are displayed as in table . in this set up the italic numbers are not provided. the number in the no no cell is estimated. the set up in table is identical to the set up in a table for two source capture recapture methodology. the size of the confidence interval for is depend ent on first the stability of the multiplier . in this case the multiplier inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology is based on observations but the number of observations becomes larger and then its stability becomes larger and hence the estimate of becomes more stable and has a smaller confidence interval. and second the size of the confidence interval depends on the size of the multiplier the smaller the mul tiplier the lower the total number not in the register currently corresponding to will be. the attractiveness of the multiplier method lies in the absence of linkage of two sources. when estimating hidden or hard to reach populations it is prob ably difficult to obtain identifying variables to link the individuals in the sam ple to the register. the absence of linkage is what makes the multiplier method different from capture recapture methodology. however the above example shows that the multiplier method also relies on the underlying assumption that the proportion of registered prostitutes in the sample is identical to the proportion of non registered prostitutes in the sample. the multiplier method is regularly used in research on the prevalence of drug use and hiv . it is also used in the ilo study discussed in the next section. in italy it is used to estimate the size of communities of undocu mented aliens for example the number of documented people from algeria in a town is known from the town register. then locations are visited where algerians meet and a multiplier is derived by asking those algerians whether they have official documentation or not. thus an estimate of the size of the community s population can be derived. international labour organization estimate of now that multiple source capture recapture methodology single source capture recapture methodology and the multiplier method have been dis cussed the recent ilo global estimate of forced labour can be discussed. ilo presented an estimate of . million victims of forced labour an esti mate with a per cent confidence interval of . million . million at any given moment in the period . although the definition of forced labour used by ilo corresponds for a the most part to the definition of traf ficking in persons in article of the trafficking in persons protocol the ilo estimate of victims of forced labour is not exactly the same as an estimate of the total number of trafficked persons p. pp. . the ilo definition of forced labour refers to all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily . the term forced labour encompasses trafficking in persons as defined in the trafficking in persons protocol and similar practices such as slavery practices similar to slavery debt bondage and serfdom. one major difference is that human trafficking for the purpose of organ removal falls under the definition of trafficking in persons in the protocol but not under the ilo definition of forced labour pp. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume the ilo approach has three steps. in the first step a capture recapture esti mate of reported cases of forced labour is found and that estimate is used to find the number of reported victims of forced labour. in the second step the stock of forced labour is estimated by taking into account the duration of exploitation as recorded in the database p. . in the third step the number of unreported cases of forced labour is estimated using the multiplier method. in the present article the focus is on capture recapture methodology and the multiplier method and therefore only the first and third steps of the estimation procedure are commented on. for further discussion of the ilo estimate see for example national rapporteur pp. and united nations office on drugs and crime p. for a general discussion on estimates of human trafficking see de cock farrell and others goodey gould go dziak and collett national rapporteur o brien tyldum zhang and zhang and others . interestingly in the capture recapture approach ilo starts by collecting data for use in two source capture recapture methodology that are then trans formed into data for use in single source capture recapture methodology in order to arrive at estimates of the number of reported cases and victims of forced labour. at the end the multiplier method is used to estimate the num ber of unreported victims of forced labour. thus the ilo report brings together nicely the previous three sections of this article. below is a summary of the ilo research followed by some suggestions for future research. data collection in the ilo research the unit of analysis is a reported case. the case repre sents a recorded piece of information p. and it may involve one or more persons who are currently or have been victims of forced labour during the reference period p. . so data were collected on cases found in media reports official sources ngos academic reports trade union reports and so on for details see the ilo research p. . the data were inde pendently collected by two teams each composed of four graduate research assistants of different nationalities. the teams collected reported cases for consecutive weeks and were based in ilo headquarters in geneva. thus team produced a list of cases and team produced a list of cases. by linking the cases found by team to the cases found by team a x contingency table could be constructed with cases found by both teams cases found by team but not by team and cases found by team but not by team . these three counts added up to reported cases found by at least one team. see also the article by ieke de vries and corinne dettmeijer vermeulen in this volume of forum on crime and society. inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology the number of reported cases missed both by team and by team was unknown and had to be estimated. as a last step the number of unreported cases was also estimated. assumptions and data analysis the two list estimate for the x table is likely to be biased because it assumes that the probability that a reported case is found by team is inde pendent of the probability that a case is found by team see the discussion in the section of this article entitled capture recapture methodology using multiple sources . this assumption will be violated for the obvious reason that some cases can be found more easily and then they are likely to be found by both teams and other cases are less likely to be found and then they will be found more often by only one team or by none of the teams. thus the probability that a reported case is found by team will be correlated to the probability that it is found by team . for this reason the ilo researchers transformed the two source data into single source data by counting the number of times that a reported case was found i.e. once twice and so on . here a case could be found multiple times by each of the teams i.e. duplicates in a team were not removed . thus the estimation problem changed from an estimation problem under multiple source capture recapture methodology see the section in this article entitled capture recapture methodology using multiple sources to single source capture recapture methodology see the section entitled capture recapture methodology using a single list . the reported cases found consisted of cases found only once and cases found more than once. using the observed count distribution the number of reported cases missed was then estimated using the chao estimator see the section entitled capture recapture methodology using a single list . this was done separately for so called incidents and aggregates for details see the ilo report . in the estimation incidents were further split into strata according to the geo graphical region and form of forced labour no details were provided on how this was done but it is assumed that a separate estimate was made for each combination of a region and form of forced labour . a complication to the simple capture recapture problem is that each reported case possibly involved more than one victim. this was solved by calculating the mean number of victims per case for the cases. this mean number was then multiplied by the estimated number of cases to arrive at an esti mated number of reported victims. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume the estimated number of reported victims was then corrected taking into consideration the amount of time that each person was a victim. this made it possible to arrive at an estimate of the number of reported victims at any point in time a so called stock estimate see the ilo report p. . as a last step a multiplier method was used to estimate the number of unre ported victims at any point in time. here the multiplier was derived from data from four national surveys of returned migrants residing in their home areas. discussion of the international labour organization estimate before discussing the ilo report in more detail the authors of this article would like to emphasize that they appreciate the work that has been done and basically have a positive evaluation of the approach. nonetheless they think that the work can be improved. some suggestions have to wait until ilo works on a third global estimate the estimate was the second estimate following an earlier estimate in . other suggestions may in principle be considered now the authors believe that this will lead to better estimates using the current data. a three teams instead of two ilo researchers were right in not making an estimate using the two list esti mator as the independence assumption for the probabilities of the two teams is for obvious reasons clearly violated. however there are two ways to try to tackle this problem. one way would be to make use of more than two teams. as discussed above in the section entitled capture recapture methodology using multiple sources with two lists i.e. two teams it is necessary to assume independ ence of inclusion probabilities. however with three lists this is not necessary pairwise dependence between sources is allowed and the independence assumption is replaced by the absence of a loglinear three factor interaction which is much less restrictive. if the ilo report for were to disentangle the cases found by a team and separate them into cases found by each of the eight team members it would result in eight separate lists. by linking these lists an way contingency table could be constructed that could be analysed using not only standard loglinear models but also latent variable models that assume that some team members are more successful in finding cases than other team members for further details see fienberg johnson and junker . inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology b covariates a second way to move away from the unrealistic two list estimator while stay ing in the two list capture recapture approach is by directly including covari ates into the estimation problem. one likely reason that the inclusion probability of a case for team is related to the inclusion probability of a case for team is the dependence of these probabilities on covariates. taking such covariates into account in the modelling phase can make the model more realistic. two examples of covariates that will probably be related are a the place where the piece of recorded information is found cases reported in some places will be easier to find by both teams than cases reported in other places or not reported at all and b the number of victims involved in a case. of course other covariates can be explored as the data set has about covari ates that can be investigated. thus the question of which covariates to use becomes an empirical question that can be answered by analysing the data. as for the question of the number of victims involved in a case as mentioned above in the ilo report the mean number of reported victims was multi plied by the estimated number of cases. however it is also stated in the ilo report that cases found more than once tended to contain higher numbers of victims than those found only once. for example the average number of vic tims in cases found just once was . in cases found twice it was and in cases found more than twice it was p. . this makes it problem atic to multiply the estimated number of cases by the mean number of vic tims. it is likely that if there is a positive relation between the number of victims included in a case and the number of times a case is found then cases that are not found but estimated are very likely to have on average a number of victims that is lower than . one solution to this problem is to bring in the number of victims of a case as a covariate in the statistical model. thus the model would yield an estimated number of victims for each case that was unobserved but estimated in other words the model will estimate not only the number of cases missed but also the number of victims involved for each of the cases. covariates are considered in the ilo report for the incidents namely region and form of forced labor but the authors of this article have the impression that these variables are taken into account by doing separate capture recapture analyses for each of the subgroups. the suggestion here is to estimate a statistical model along the lines discussed in this article in the section entitled capture recapture methodology using a single list using the chao estimator that takes covariate information into account. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume c the chao estimator turning to the single source capture recapture approach as mentioned above in the section entitled capture recapture methodology using a single list the chao estimator provides a lower bound estimate of the population size and this lower bound is closer to the true population size when the counts are generated by a homogeneous poisson distribution. the ilo report is overly optimistic about the fit of the poisson distribution to the data see the ilo report p. . one way to ensure that the lower bound of the chao estimate is closer to the true population size is by including covariates. this can be done using the approach where the poisson parameter in the chao estimator is a function of covariates see b hning and others . for the ilo estimate this implies that the current estimate may well be too low and that by including covariates into the model the estimate will become larger and closer to the true esti mate. the number of victims involved in a case is a natural candidate for being a covariate. d multiplier method as a last step a multiplier method was used to estimate the number of unre ported victims at any point in time. here the multiplier was derived from four national surveys mostly surveys of returned migrants residing in their home areas. the estimate arrived at was that . per cent of the cases of forced labour are reported. this leads to a multiplier of . . . . in other words for each reported case of forced labour there are an estimated . unreported cases. closer examination of this multiplier produces at least two concerns. the first concern is that the percentage is very low and this makes the multiplier very unstable. for example . per cent every reported case is to be multiplied with . . with a slightly different percentage say per cent this multiplier changes to . thus this makes the final ilo estimate very unstable. it appears that in the ilo report random variation of about . per cent has not been taken into account in the confidence interval of the final ilo estimate. the results of four of the pilot surveys discussed in the ilo survey guidelines to estimate forced labour of adults and children have been used in the context of the generation of the ilo global estimate of forced labour in p. . ilo did not disclose the names of the four countries used. inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology the second concern is related to the first concern. in the surveys the percent age of cases reported is . per cent. similar to two sample capture recapture methodology there is an independence assumption underlying the multiplier method. this independence assumption relates to the question will . per cent also be the percentage of the cases reported not in the surveys this is the assumption made. however it is unclear how this percentage relates to percentages in countries other than the four countries with a survey whether this percentage is actually higher among those victims who came back than among victims who did not come back and so on. it follows from the first point that minor deviations from the independence assumption will lead to large deviations in the estimate of the population size. discussion the capture recapture method is a well known method used in social sci ences and public health research for estimating the total size of hidden or hard to reach populations see for example international working group for disease monitoring and forecasting and chao and others . in this article the aim has been to provide an overview of the different ways in which the capture recapture method can be applied. the authors consider the methodologies discussed in this article to be some of the viable methods that can be used to obtain local estimates of the total num ber of trafficked persons. the capture recapture methodology has also been applied for the purpose of producing global estimates. ilo has applied the capture recapture method by using a combination of all the methodologies discussed in the last three sections of this article in order to reach the estimate of . million victims of forced labour globally and the authors have provided some suggestions to further improve that estimate. when comparing the pro duction of local estimates with the production of global estimates it seems that because of extrapolation issues in producing the global estimates the global esti mates have to meet a greater number of assumptions which seems to make them more vulnerable than local estimates in terms of their reliability and validity. in practical situations when local estimates for a particular type of human traf ficking are needed the main challenge is to find the methodology that best fits the problem. when applying the capture recapture methodology in the field of human trafficking in a particular location and time it is likely that not all the assumptions of the capture recapture method will be met see national rappor teur p. . this however does not necessarily mean that no single method can be used to estimate the size of the target population. as an example consider inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume one of the capture recapture assumptions that there must be a closed population discussed above in the sections entitled capture recapture methodology using multiple sources and capture recapture methodology using a single list . in many locations in the world this assumption will be violated in research on traf ficked persons for instance trafficked persons who have been sexually exploited research has shown some kind of local mobility e.g. between cities of traf ficked persons in the sex industry see for example siegel . in these loca tions the research population is open and this hinders the capture recapture estimation procedures discussed above in the sections entitled capture recapture methodology using multiple sources and capture recapture methodology using a single list . one solution discussed in those sections namely limiting the period of observation may help to circumvent the prob lem but the effectiveness of this solution will depend on the time intervals in circulating the trafficked persons. yet choosing this alternative implies an esti mate on trafficked persons that has the disadvantage of having a relatively larger confidence interval. on the other hand it may still be viable to estimate the size of the population using the multiplier method. here two elements are needed a register and a multiplier and these are not necessarily hampered by an open population problem when they are suitably chosen. also it is worth considering that violation of one or more of the capture recapture assump tions in research on a particular form of human trafficking does not necessar ily imply that the same assumptions are also violated in research on another form of human trafficking. for instance persons who are trafficked for the purpose of being exploited as agricultural workers may be circulated less often thus the assumption of a closed population might be met more easily. in closing it should be noted that there are also other methods that can theo retically be used in specific situations to estimate the size of populations. those methods include respondent driven sampling the network scale up method detection controlled estimation and randomized response. space limitations have prevented the authors from discussing those methods in any detail in this article. they are only mentioned here as introductions on the use of those methods can be found on the web. references . eurostat trafficking in human beings methodologies and working papers luxembourg publications office of the european union . . global report on trafficking in persons united nations publication sales no. e. .iv. . inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology . international labour organization ilo global estimate of forced labour results and methodology geneva international labour office . . micha lla de cock directions for national and international data collection on forced labour working paper no. geneva international labour office . . amy farrel and others review of existing estimates of victims of human traffick ing in the united states and recommendations for improving research and measurement of human trafficking washington d.c. humanity united . . jo goodey human trafficking sketchy data and policy responses criminology and criminal justice vol. no. pp. . . amanda j. gould from pseudoscience to protoscience estimating human trafficking and modern forms of slavery paper submitted for the second annual interdisciplinary conference on human trafficking october . . elzbieta m. gozdziak and elizabeth a. collett research on human trafficking in north america a review of literature in data and research on human trafficking a global survey offprint of the special issue of international migration vol. frank laczko and elzbieta gozdziak eds. geneva international organization for migration pp. . . national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children trafficking in human beings visible and invisible a quantitative report the hague bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . . erin o brien dark numbers challenges in measuring human trafficking dialogue e journal vol. no. . . gury tyldum limitations in research on human trafficking international migration vol. no. october pp. . . ronald weitzer new directions in research on human trafficking the annals of the american academy of political social science vol. no. may pp. . . sheldon x. zhang measuring labor trafficking a research note crime law and social change vol. no. pp. . . sheldon x. zhang and others estimating labor trafficking among unauthor ized migrant workers in san diego the annals of the american academy of political and social science vol. no. may pp. . . united nations treaty series vol. no. . . andrea di nicola researching into human trafficking issues and problems in human trafficking maggy lee ed. cullompton devon willan publishing pp. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume . frank laczko and marco a. gramegna developing better indicators of human trafficking brown journal of world affairs vol. x no. summer fall pp. . . united nations office on drugs and crime abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons issue paper vienna . . h. j. clawson m. layne and k. small estimating human trafficking into the united states development of a methodology document no. fairfax virginia caliber . . frank laczko data and research on human trafficking international migra tion vol. nos. and pp. . . g. tyldum and a. brunovskis describing the unobserved methodological challenges in empirical studies on human trafficking international migration vol. nos. and pp. . . yvonne m. bishop stephen e. fienberg and paul w. holland discrete multi variate analysis theory and applications reprint of the edition published by mit press new york springer science and business media . . international working group for disease monitoring and forecasting capture recapture and multiple record systems estimation part i history and theoretical devel opment american journal of epidemiology vol. no. pp. . . anne chao and others the applications of capture recapture models to epide miological data statistics in medicine vol. no. pp. . . peter g. m. van der heijden and others people born in the middle east but residing in the netherlands invariant population size estimates and the role of active and passive covariates annals of applied statistics vol. no. pp. . . susanna gerritse peter g.m. van der heijden and b.f.m. bakker sensitivity of population size estimation for violating parametric assumptions in loglinear mod els paper presented at the mto colloquium tilburg netherlands january . . eugene n. zwane karin van der pal de bruin and peter g. m. van der heijden the multiple record systems estimator when registrations refer to different but over lapping populations statistics in medicine vol. no. pp. . . shirley pledger kenneth h. pollock and james l. norris open capture recapture models with heterogeneity cormack jolly seber model biometrics vol. no. pp. . . thomas n. herzog fritz j. scheuren and william e. winkler data quality and record linkage techniques new york springer science and business media . inner e ck hk.indd estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology . stephen e. fienberg matthew johnson and brian w. junker classical multi level and bayesian approaches to population size estimation using multiple lists journal of the royal statistical society statistics in society series a vol. no. pp. . . anthony j. webster and richard kemp estimating omissions from searches the american statistician vol. no. pp. . . peter g. m. van der heijden maarten j. l. f. cruyff and dankmar bohning capture recapture to estimate crime populations in encyclopedia of criminology and criminal justice gerben bruinsma and david weisburd eds. new york springer science and business media pp. . . peter g. m. van der heijden maarten j. l. f. cruyff and hans c. van houwelingen estimating the size of a criminal population from police registrations using the trun cated poisson regression model statistica neerlandica vol. no. pp. . . peter g. m. van der heijden and others point and interval estimation of the truncated poisson regression model statistical modelling vol. no. pp. . . maarten j.l.f. cruyff and peter g. m. van der heijden point and interval estimation of the population size using a zero truncated negative binomial regression model biometrical journal vol. no. pp. . . n.h.a. van hest and others estimating infectious diseases incidence validity of capture recapture analysis and truncated models for incomplete count data epidemiology and infection vol. no. pp. . . daniel zelterman robust estimation in truncated discrete distributions with application to capture recapture experiments journal of statistical planning and inference vol. no. pp. . . dankmar b hning and peter g. m. van der heijden a covariate adjustment for zero truncated approaches to estimating the size of hidden and elusive popula tions the annals of applied statistics vol. no. pp. . . anne chao estimating animal abundance with capture frequency data jour nal of wildlife management vol. no. pp. . . dankmar b hning some general comparative points on chao s and zelter man s estimators of population size scandinavian journal of statistics vol. no. pp. . . dankmar b hning and others a generalization of chao s estimator for covari ate information biometrics vol. no. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume . peter g. m. van der heijden guus cruts and maarten cruyff methods for population size estimation of problem drug users using a single registration interna tional journal of drug policy vol. no. pp. . . european monitoring centre for drugs and drug abuse annual report the state of the drugs problem in europe luxembourg publications office of the european union . . a.a.n. cruts and m. w. van laar aantal problematische harddrugsgebruikers in nederland utrecht netherlands trimbos institute netherlands institute of mental health and addiction . . international labour organization hard to see harder to count survey guide lines to estimate forced labour of adults and children geneva international labour office . . dina siegel mobility of sex workers in european cities european journal of criminal policy and research vol. no. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking by fabrizio sarrica labour was the first price the original purchase money that was paid for all things. it was not by gold or by silver but by labour that all wealth of the world was origi nally purchased ... adam smith the wealth of nations abstract the author approaches trafficking in persons and forced labour from the per spective of the labour market. the basic consideration is that traffickers and exploiters are robbing the communities of victims of trafficking in persons of their most valuable resource labour. he compares the economic conditions of the labourer and the employer in an exploitative situation against condi tions where the labourer is free to choose his or her working conditions. he calculates the economic losses and the benefits in each account of trafficking in persons revealing who gains and who loses as a result of such crimes. according to the author not only do forced labour and human trafficking have an economic impact on the victims and their communities but also soci ety as a whole suffers economic losses when coerced labour is used. keywords trafficking in persons forced labour labour market elasticity of labour demand and supply exploiter victim development and crime cheap labour and its maximum use are the quest of persons who engage in human trafficking. these criminals are recruiting deceiving buying selling transporting segregating and coercing other people for the economic value that can be squeezed from the victims labour. traffickers steal the economic value of this labour from their victims. of course this is just part of the story. while the traffickers are pursuing this economic goal the victims of human trafficking are in addition to being deprived of the value of their labour are also often deprived of their dignity their health and their lives. victims of human trafficking or forced labour suffer terrible human rights violations that will affect them for the rest of their lives. forced labour including trafficking in persons for the purpose of forced labour slavery and similar practices is a crime driven by the demand for cheap labour. research officer global report on trafficking in persons unit united nations office on drugs and crime. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume the demand for forced labourers including trafficked persons is ultimately the demand for the services provided by the person who is forced to work . the aim of this article is to understand how such crime is affected by the dynamics of the labour markets in which the victims of such crime are forced to operate. the article also includes a discussion on the economic impact of forced labour and human trafficking on society as whole on the victims and on their communities. forced labour is defined in the forced labour convention no. as all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily . the definition comprises two elements the work is undertaken involun tarily and this happens because the labourer is under the menace of a penalty. it is clear that the first element is the consequence of the second. in short forced labour is about forcing persons to accept employment or terms of employment that they would otherwise reject . the concept of human trafficking is closely connected with that of forced labour. it can be summarized as the acquisition of people by improper means such as force fraud or deception for the purpose of exploiting them. so if a victim of forced labour has been recruited transported or harboured with improper means he or she can be legally defined as a trafficking victim and the recruiter transporter or harbourer is a trafficker. the economics of slavery these forms of labour exploitation are not just recent phenomena. historically a large part of labour transactions have been coercive . slavery and forced labour were common forms of labour in many civilizations from the time of the roman empire to rural russia in the eighteenth century and to the cotton fields of the united states of america in the nineteenth century. nowadays forms of slavery and forced labour are still present the international labour organization ilo has estimated that there are over million forced in article of the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organ ized crime trafficking in persons is defined as follows trafficking in persons shall mean the recruitment transportation transfer harbouring or receipt of persons by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion of abduction of fraud of deception of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person for the purpose of exploitation. exploitation shall include at a minimum the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploita tion forced labour or services slavery or practices similar to slavery servitude or the removal of organs general assembly resolution annex ii . inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking labourers worldwide including in the sex industry. ilo research indicates that the global illegal profit made through the economic exploitation of forced labourers outside the sex industry has reached . billion para. . for decades economists have been debating about the viability of an economy where the labour market included forms of coerced labour. in adam smith stated that assessing the costs of the labour conducted by slaves to be the most expensive form of labour argued that to satisfy the demand for labour it was cheaper to use the free labour supply than slave labour. studies have recently been conducted on the effect of coerced labour on the economy in the nineteenth century see loria and bouchard and wakefield . in the s fogel and engerman concluded that during the period of slavery in the united states african slaves had a relatively high productivity and the slave system was economically efficient. in the discussion below the conclusions of fogel and engerman are challenged. domar provided an analysis of the contribution of coerced labour to economic development throughout history using as examples the roman empire russia in the fifteenth century and slavery in the americas. he hypothesized that an increased supply of labour reduces the economic attrac tiveness of making use of forced labour and this is the reason why in ancient times slavery and serfdom were introduced during periods of demographic decline due to war famine or disease. according to domar the development of capital intensive economic sectors made slavery economically unattractive. domar s view is also discussed below. in bergstrom argued that slavery was an economically viable system in the united states prior to the civil war he described it as an efficient means of dis tributing wealth in a manner favourable to slaves . conversely barzel argued that slave labour was economically efficient only for certain types of work activity such as working on large cotton plantations because free labourers refused to work under the inhumane conditions that slaves were forced to work under even if the remuneration offered for working under those conditions was higher than the wages offered for other jobs. thus while it is true that slaves received better remuneration than free labourers it is also true that the type of work done by slaves would have never been accepted by the slaves if they had been free to choose . basu defines labour coercion as forcing a worker into an exchange for labour from which he or she obtains a negative utility. naqvi and wemh ner consider that given a person s feasible set of actions labour coercion implies compelling an agent to engage in transactions that he or she would not have chosen to engage in. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume more recently acemoglu and wolitzky proposed a microeconomic model of labour coercion. they demonstrated that under equal conditions greater demand for labour increases the economic incentive to make use of labour coercion. they hypothesized that the relation between labour scarcity and intensity of coercion may be positive or negative depending on the structure of the market where coerced labour is used. finally they demonstrated that coercion is always socially inefficient as it involves costly ways of transferring resources and utility from workers to employees. their conclusions are also discussed below together with an alternative to their analysis. the labour market in order to assess how the dynamics of the labour market may influence traf ficking in persons and forced labour and how these crimes do have an eco nomic impact on the victims and their communities the analysis starts with the basics of labour economics and compares a situation of free labour and one of trafficking. figure i shows the demand for labour d and the labour supply s . figure i. the labour market in a free labour market and under exploitative working conditions the horizontal axis shows the quantity of labour demanded in hours per day . the vertical axis shows the hourly wages. the labour demand curve d shows how much the employer would pay to receive a certain amount of labour. the labour supply curve s shows the quantity of hours that the labourer would be ready to work for that hourly wage. at the same time it shows the wages that the demand for labour supply of labour wages wtr htr v htr hours inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking labourer would accept to provide a specific quantity of labour . the shape and the inclination of the curve depend on the type of labour demanded and on the individual preferences of the person demanding such working activity. the labourer would like to receive as much wages as possible and the employer would like to pay as little wages as possible. if all the theoretical assumptions are satisfied in a free labour market the demand for and supply of labour may find stability see figure i . in a free labour market supply and demand may also never meet see figure ii and thus there may be no equilibrium on the labour market. for example barzel reported on the inhumane working conditions in the cotton fields at the time of slavery in the united states. such working conditions prevented free labourers from accepting wages that would have been higher than in other types of field labour. certain types of work would be accepted by potential employees only if they were paid wages higher than what the employer would be willing to offer. in these cases there would be no equilibrium on the labour market. figure ii. when supply and demand do not meet in addition there are working activities that would never be accepted regardless of the wages offered. in such cases the supply curve would always coincide with the vertical axis. if and when equilibrium is reached the number of hours worked heq and the amount of wages paid weq satisfy both parties. the surplus of the supplier of labour represents the labourer s economic benefit for working each hour up to heq at an hourly wage weq greater than he or she would have requested to work that hour. similarly the surplus of the demand for labour is the economic wages hours hours supply of labour demand for labour inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume benefit that the employer gains for each working hour up to heq paid less weq than what he or she would have paid the labourer for that working hour. in figure iii area a represents the surplus of the labourer for agreeing to work an amount of hours heq and area b represents the surplus of the supplier for agreeing to pay an hourly wage weq. figure iii. equilibrium in the labour market and benefits for the stakeholders the economics of forced labour and human trafficking in a context of coerced labour whether the supply of and the demand for labour meet or not is totally irrelevant. the quantity of hours worked and the salary are imposed on the victim who has no possibility of negotiating or refusing. under exploitative circumstances the victim is forced to work more than he or she ordinarily would and for a salary that is much lower than he or she ordinarily would have accepted. the exploitative working conditions that are typical in cases of forced labour and human trafficking are shown in figure i and can be mathematically summarized as follows a htr heq htr v and wtr weq wtr v where htr is the number of hours that the victim of trafficking is forced to work htr v is the number of hours that the victim would work for the salary received wtr is the salary that the victim receives and wtr v is the salary that the victim would require for that amount of work. a b hours heq supply of labour demand for labour wages weq inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking the hours the victim is forced to work are more than the hours the victim would work for the salary received. the salary the victim receives is less than the salary the victim would require for that amount of work. an increase of the extent of exploitation can be mathematically represented by an increase in the difference between the desired salary and the salary actually given w wtr wtr v and between the desired hours worked and the actual hours worked under coercion h htr htr v. the victim s economic loss under exploitative working conditions mathemically summarized in a the victim will be paid much less than he or she would in a free market. not only the victim s income but also the surplus of the labour supply will be reduced compared with the free market situation. in figure iv area c represents the victim s income loss due to reduced salary. figure iv. economic loss of victims of forced labour area d is the loss of the victim s economic surplus. the victim s total eco nomic loss is shown in figure iv as area c d victim s loss c d wtr v wtr htr equation is not only an abstract mathematical exercise but also a practi cal tool for calculating the compensation of the victim for at least some part of the economic damages he or she suffered. in addition most victims of forced labour are exposed to violence abuses and threats that cannot be measured in terms of money. hours supply of labour htr demand for labour htr v d c htr v htr v wtr wtr v wtr v wtr v inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume equation can be further developed as follows victim s loss wtr v htr wtr htr factor is defined as the salary the victim would demand multiplied by the total number of hours he or she has been coerced into working wtr v htr . factor is defined as the salary offered multiplied by the number of working hours imposed on the victim wtr htr . equation can be simplified as follows victim s loss factor factor the greater the demand for labour the higher the salary demanded and thus the higher factor . equation implies that increased demand for labour on the market results in greater economic damages for the exploited worker. furthermore the greater the labour supply the less the salary offered. con versely the less the supply of labour the greater the demand and the more the employer is willing to pay for a certain number of hours worked . equation implies that under exploitative working conditions the victim s loss is greater when the labour supply is smaller. as shown in figure v when the initial labour supply s changes to a reduced labour supply s the area indicating the victim s loss increases. figure v. victim s economic losses for different labour supplies equation can also be developed as follows victim s loss htr wtr v wtr htr htrv htr htrv hours htr s s wtr wtr v wtr v d inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking victim s loss htr h w htr htrv when calculated over the labour supply curve h w is the own wage elas ticity of the labour supply w. hence victim s loss htr w htr htrv according to equation the more rigid the labour supply curve the greater the economic loss of the victims of forced labour. equation is represented by area c d in figure vi. this area is greater when rebus sic stantibus the labour supply curve is more rigid compared with a more elastic labour supply. when the initial labour supply s changes to a more rigid labour supply s the area indicating the victim s loss increases. figure vi. victim s economic losses for different elasticities of the labour supply in practice when the labour supply is more rigid to variation of salary labour activities become particularly hard for the worker for an additional hour of work the labourer would demand a substantially higher remuneration. victims are more affected economically when exploited in more difficult labour activities. what is less evident is that the elasticity of the demand for labour also has an impact on the victim s economic loss. the same h w when calculated over the labour demand curve is the own wage elasticity of the demand for labour w. the more elastic the demand for labour the greater the victim s economic loss. as shown in figure vii when the initial labour demand d changes to a more elastic labour demand d the area indicating the victim s loss increases. hours htr s s wtr wtr v wtr v d inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume figure vii. victim s economic losses for different labour demands the victim s economic loss is also affected by the structure of labour supply and demand in the free market as the structure is a function of the elasticity of the supply and demand curves. some forms of trafficking end in exploitation that is not acceptable to the victims regardless of the remuneration. in such cases for every htr wtr v thus according to equation victim s loss . this type of labour can be represented graphically by a labour supply curve that never appears in the positive quadrant see figure viii . figure viii. labour market when the supply is never positive the economic gain of the exploiter obviously there are more economic benefits to be gained by using victims of forced labour than by using free labourers. this additional economic surplus of the demand for labour is shown as area f in figure ix. the exploiter s increased economic benefits are directly derived from the victim s reduced hours d d htr htr wtr wtr v wtr v s htr d d wtr v wtr wtr v s hours htr hours wages hours demand supply wtr v wtr htr htr v inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking benefits. in the words of acemoglu and wolitzky coercion allows the pro ducer to steal utility from the agent . figure ix. economic gain of the demand in situations of forced labour this additional economic surplus of the exploiter is shown in equation f weq heq heq htr w d h wtr htr f weq wtr heq htr weq wtr htrweq heqwtr heq htr w d h where factor is defined as weq wtr heq htr weq wtr and factor is defined as htrweq heqwtr heq htr w d h . thus equation becomes exploiter s gain factor factor if the exploitative working conditions mathemically summarized in a on page are applied to equation and then to equation equation will always be . it is always economically advantageous for the employer to exploit workers regardless of the labour market or the economic situation unless an efficient criminal justice system serves as an adequate disincentive. of course such exploitation is more economically advantageous under some economic conditions than under others. by definition factor is a function of the own wage elasticity of the demand for labour w heq htr weq wtr multiplied by the squared variation of the salary. thus according to equation the more rigid the demand for labour the greater factor and the eco nomic gain of the employer who makes use of forced labour will be. hourshtr demand for labour supply of labour htr v f e wtr inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume according to the hicks marshall laws of derived demand more rigid demand for labour is characterized by short run productions difficulty in finding substitutes reduced proportion of labour costs to production costs and rigid demand for the final services or goods produced. these are the pro duction contexts where it is more profitable to make use of exploitative work ing conditions and where more attention should be paid by the criminal justice system. figure ix shows the transfer of welfare from the victim to the exploiter. this is not a linear function. by definition of factor the exploiter s gain is a nega tive exponential function of the salary reduction. by reducing a unit of salary per hour worked the exploiter would increasingly and exponentially gain in terms of economic surplus. not only does the exploiter have an economic interest in exploiting the victims but this interest grows exponentially with the intensity of the exploitation. by definition of factor equation implies that the exploiter s gain is positively related to the demand for labour. this has two implications first when the demand for labour is low there is a reduced interest in using forced labour second the analysis confirms domar s idea that the diffusion of capital intensive production reduces the advantages of forced labour. economies based on labour intensive production are more interested in making use of forced labour. the social cost of forced labour the analysis above shows forced labour and human trafficking are about transferring economic wealth from labour supply to the demand for labour from the victims to the exploiters from the victim s community of origin to his or her community of destination. as mentioned above the economic bene fits gained from the demand are stolen directly from the victim of forced labour. at the same time not all the labourer s loss is transferred to the demand for labour. acemoglu and wolitzky demonstrated that utilitarian social welfare is always lower under coercion than in a free labour market in this article an alternative analysis is proposed. what is the part of economic wealth that is lost by forcing a person to work under exploitative working conditions in a society comprising two persons the exploiter and the victim this can be easily calculated by subtracting the victim s loss as represented in equation to the exploiter s gain as repre sented in equation . inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking social balance weq heq heq htr w d h wtr htr wtr v htr wtr htr social balance weq heq wtr v htr heq htr w d h the element heq htr w d h varies according to the hours of exploitation htr as well as the shape and inclination of the demand for labour. this element ranges from a minimum value heq htr w d h when htr heq i.e. when the curve representing the demand for labour is vertical to a maximum value heq htr w d h htr heq wtr when wtr weq i.e. when the curve representing the demand for labour is horizontal . assuming heq htr w d h reaches the maximum value equation turns into social balance weq heq wtr v htr htr heq wtr social balance heq weq wtr htr wtr v wtr applying the exploitative working conditions mathemically summarized in a on page to equation will result in social balance always equation indicates that the exploiter s economic gain does not compen sate for the victim s economic loss. a society comprised of the aggregated supply and aggregated demand of labour always loses passing from free labour to forced labour. this result is in line with acemoglu and wolitzky while contradicting bergstrom s hypothesis that slavery is an economically viable system . furthermore equation indicates that the total welfare is a function of heq htr and wtr v wtr thus the higher the degree of exploitation the more the loss will be to society as a whole. the more forced labour and trafficking for the purpose of forced labour are used the higher the eco nomic costs to society as a whole. the social costs do not include public spending related to the provision of assistance to the victims of forced labour law enforcement activities and measures connected with the prevention campaigns. discussion moving from the microlevel to the macrolevel the passage of wealth from the demand for labour to the supply of labour by means of coercion can be inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume substantially represented as the transfer of wealth from the victims to the exploiters. if the exploitation takes place within the same community this wealth is transferred between the parties involved and remains within the same community. if the victim is recruited in one community and then exploited somewhere else the economic value of the stolen labour is also transferred from the community of origin to the community where the victim is exploited. the element of movement brings economic losses to the vic tim s community of origin which are partly transferred into economic gains for the community of destination. in practice the victims loss takes the form of reduced gross national product gnp for the victim s country or community of origin as a result of for example fewer remittances and thus less savings consumption and invest ment. at the same time the exploiters will be able to consume invest and save more mainly in the community where the exploitation takes place. the above considerations can be used to calculate the extent of the economic impact of human trafficking and forced labour on the parties involved. under normal circumstances migrant agricultural workers would receive a freely negotiated salary reflecting their wishes and needs and that would contribute to the gnp of their country or community of origin. their remittances would be in the form of consumption savings and investment thus the migrants salaries would also have a positive impact on the local economy in their home communities and the gross domestic product gdp in their home country. if the migrant workers were to become victims of forced labour their exploit ative working conditions would have a negative economic impact on them and their community of origin in terms of their country s gdp. as mentioned above part of the economic loss of victims of forced labour is directly transferred to the country of destination. the greater surplus of demand for labour will take the form of cheaper labour at the disposal of the community of destination. eventually this will mean more profits and thus more investments for the demand for labour and that will be translated into greater gdp for the community of destination. eventually the entire com munity of destination will profit from the labour stolen from the victim s community of origin in terms of greater gdp and lower priced final goods produced under exploitative working conditions. gnp is the total value of all final goods and services produced by a country s factors of production in this case labour and sold on the market in a given time period. in the case of trafficking the victim s loss is partially transferred to another community or country which is the victim s country of destination. inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking as an example in the italian authorities investigated a case of traffick ing in persons for the purpose of forced labour in the agricultural sector. the operation was called terra promessa . persons were recruited in poland to work in the agricultural sector in the south of italy. before leaving for italy the workers agreed to certain working standards eventually they were forced at gunpoint to work under exploitative conditions. they had to work for hours per day for a fee of about euros per hour. in addition the victims had to pay their exploiters for accommodation and food as well as about euros as an initial fee for being given access to this work opportu nity . the number of victims officially identified by the italian authori ties was . calculations using equation and the information reported above and in the court file on this trafficking cases how that in this single account of traf ficking about euros per day were stolen from the victims community of origin. the polish authorities estimated that about victims were involved in this type of trafficking during the agricultural season. the production period for this specific case would normally take days. thus if all the assumptions are correct this single account of trafficking would have had an economic impact on poland amounting to about . mil lion euros for slightly more than one month of exploitation. in the international labour organization ilo conducted a study on the migrant labour force in the republic of moldova. as a result of this study ilo estimated that moldovans were victims of trafficking for forced labour para. working under conditions very similar to those uncov ered in operation terra promessa . if the parameters for the polish victims are applied to the moldovan victims it can be calculated that the republic of according to information concerning operation terra promessa and reported by the italian authorities and by investigative reporter fabrizio gatti the victims were forced to collect tomatoes for hours per day and received about euros per hour when remuneration was actually provided. as a consequence these persons received at most about euros per day. it is impossible to estimate the labour supply curve of those particular labourers however it can be assumed that polish labourers willingly migrating to italy to do some agricultural work would not have accepted economic conditions inferior to those they would have found in poland at that time. according to ilo minimum wages in poland for agricultural work was in euros for an eight hour working day. these persons would have agreed to work an additional seven hours for another euros as it is clear that they would normally have requested much more as compensation for the greater degree of fatigue. according to this very minimal working condition they would have accepted voluntarily the total daily salary could have been euros per day. as a result it can be said that the exploiter stole from each victim euros per day euros . multiplying euros by the number of victims yields euros per day. the season for the collection of tomatoes normally lasts between and days per year. the value of the labour stolen to these victims was calculated to be about euros per day thus ranging from to euros per season for the victims detected by the authorities. if the number of victims was about for the same season the estimated total value of the labour stolen from the worker s community of origin would be at least about . million euros in one season. inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume moldova lost about million euros per working day about per cent of the country s annual gdp. in field research conducted in the united states in zhang esti mated victims of labour trafficking violations in san diego county california the vast majority of the victims being mexican nationals. even if in this case not all the victims suffered the same level of exploitation as in the italian case it gives an idea of the severity of the problem and thus of its economic impact on the mexican economy. according to a similar study conducted in samut sakhon province of thai land about per cent of the migrants from myanmar probably about persons may be victims of trafficking for forced labour working under extremely exploitative conditions. such situations have a devastating economic impact on the home communities of the victims. conclusions this article presents an analysis of the losses and gains in a situation of forced labour and in which conditions those losses and gains are more significant. free labour and forced labour are compared on the basis of an analysis of the labour market. in the first case the supply of and demand for labour can set working conditions according to the shape inclination and size of the labour ers wishes and needs. in the second case the demand for labour exploits the labourers who are forced to accept working conditions that they would other wise refuse. the author assesses the conditions under which these gains and losses change thus qualifying the labour sectors that are more vulnerable to coerced labour including trafficking in persons. the article provides tools for measuring the opportunity costs and thus the economic losses of the labourer under exploitative working conditions and the monetary gains of the exploiter and the trafficker in a situation of forced labour. these gains are in the form of lower costs for the employers and thus greater profits for the producers and dividends for the shareholders. the prof its feed the demand for forced labour including trafficking in persons. to prevent such forms of exploitation deterrents should be introduced to com pensate for such gains in order to prevent human trafficking. according to the world bank the gdp of the republic of moldova in was about . million http data.worldbank.org indicator ny.gdp.mktp.cd countries . inner e ck hk.indd stealing labour an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking trafficking in persons has a clear and quantifiable impact on the economic development of the countries of origin of the victims. exploiters steal the most important productive factor of these countries labour. labour is quan tifiable and can be monetized. the author provides a tool for estimating the economic damage to these communities resulting from forced labour. the analysis shows that the impact of human trafficking is decisive in hindering proper economic development in countries affected by this crime. finally the author investigates one of the debated topics in the economics of slavery. the analysis shows that utilitarian social welfare is always greater in a situation with a free labour market than in a situation of forced labour. not only do forced labour and human trafficking have an adverse economic impact on the victim and his or her community but they result in society as a whole suffering economic losses. references . gergana danailova trainor and patrick belser globalization and the illicit market for human trafficking an empirical analysis of supply and demand working paper no. geneva international labour office . . united nations treaty series vol. no. . . daron acemoglu and alexander wolitzky the economics of labor coercion nber working paper no. cambridge massachusetts national bureau of economic research . . united nations treaty series vol. no. . . international labour organization ilo global estimate of forced labour results and methodology geneva international labour office . . international labour organization the cost of coercion global report under the follow up to the ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work geneva international labour office . . adam smith an inquiry to the nature and causes of the wealth of nations th ed. edwin cannan ed. vol. london methuen . . achille loria and a. bouchard les bases conomiques de la constitution sociale political science quarterly vol. no. n.d. pp. . inner e ck hk.indd forum on crime and society volume . edward g. wakefield a view of the art of colonization with present reference to the british empire in letters between a statesman and a colonist new york cambridge university press . . robert w. fogel and stanley l. engerman time on the cross the economics of american negro slavery boston little brown and company . . evsey d. domar the causes of slavery and serfdom a hypothesis the jour nal of economic history vol. no. pp. . . ted bergstrom on the existence and optimality of competitive equilibrium for a slave economy the review of economic studies vol. no. pp. . . yoram barzel an economic analysis of slavery journal of law and economics vol. no. pp. . . kaushik basu one kind of power oxford economic papers vol. no. pp. . . nadeem naqvi and frederick wemh ner power coercion and games land lords play journal of development economics vol. no. pp. . . hal r. varian microeconomic analysis rd ed. new york w. w. norton and company . . john r. hicks the theory of wages nd ed. london macmillan and com pany pp. . . alfred marshall principles of economics th ed. london macmillan and com pany pp. . . polacchi al lavoro come sciavi scoperta tratta nel foggiano la repubblica july . available at www.repubblica.it . . fabrizio gatti i was a slave in puglia wolfgang achtner transl. l espresso september . . sheldon x. zhang looking for a hidden population trafficking of migrant labour ers in san diego county san diego california san diego state university . . united nations inter agency project on human trafficking estimating labor trafficking a study of burmese migrant workers in samut sakhon thailand bangkok . inner e ck hk.indd inner e ck hk.indd inner e ck hk.indd 