 microsoft word vertaling bewerkt september .doc trafficking in human beings supplementary figures fourth report of the dutch national rapporteur anna korvinus national rapporteur essy van dijk heleen de jonge van ellemeet dagmar koster monika smit bureau nrm the hague the universal notion of protecting human dignity which is at stake in case of thb is underlined by the words mensenhandel is verboden trafficking in human beings is prohibited on the front cover of this report. these words are taken from the charter of fundamental rights of the european union which is part of the treaty establishing a constitution for europe. following the example of the dutch artist henk visch who organised in an exposition under the title mensenhandel is verboden the words are put in handwriting to stress the importance of their notion in daily practice. table of contents overview of tables v abbreviations used vii introduction victims . introduction . victim registrations kept by the foundation against trafficking in women . . regions and countries of origin . . age and gender . . the reporters . possible victims in the police information node system . . country of birth . . age and gender investigation . introduction . investigations into trafficking in human beings . suspects . methods adopted by traffickers in human beings . . recruitment . . travel and residence documents . . putting victims to work in the sex industry . . criminal collaboration . victims in investigations . . reports . . minors . . countries of origin . investigation methods and process . . investigation methods used . . financial aspects the public prosecution service and prosecution . introduction . thb cases registered with the public prosecution service . the suspects . cases dealt with by the public prosecution service . settlement by the court summary . introduction . investigation . . number and type of investigations . . reason for the investigations . . investigation methods used . . financial aspects . prosecution . . number and types of cases . . cases dealt with by the public prosecution service . . trial and appeal iv trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur . victims . . victims registered with the stv . . victims in the ikp s victim registration system . . victim information from the investigations . suspects . . investigations and suspects . . suspects prosecuted bibliography appendices appendix article a criminal code appendix supplementary tables appendix explanation of the research methods used appendix notes on tables and statistics appendix a few provisional figures for the year overview of tables table . origin of possible victims registered by the stv per annum table . most common countries of origin of possible victims registered by the stv per annum table . age distribution of victims reported to the stv per annum table . reporters of victims per annum table . most common countries of birth of possible victims in ikp s per annum table . age distribution of possible victims in ikp s table . investigations into thb completed each year according to thb type table . reason for investigation per annum table . suspects of thb per annum table . average number of suspects in each investigation each year and by thb type table . most common nationalities of suspects of thb per annum table . most common countries of birth of suspects of thb per annum table . most common countries of birth of suspects according to type of thb to table . level of awareness of proprietors according to the police and table . arrests of recruiters in cross border thb per annum table . passport of victims per annum table . prostitution sectors involved per annum table . means of coercion per annum table . countries where victims are put to work per annum table . criminal organisations of thb per annum table . reports made by victims of thb by year and type of thb table . investigations involving underage victims by year and type of thb table . most common countries of origin of victims per annum table . countries of origin with and without visa requirement per annum table . investigation methods used and table . financial investigation and confiscation per annum table . number of cases registered and cases that also involve underage victims per annum table . type of thb per year of registration table . most serious crime per year of registration table . most common countries of birth of suspects per year of registration table . ranking of most frequently occurring countries of birth of suspects by year of registration table . pre trial detention per year of registration table . cases dealt with by the pps per year in which they were dealt with table . settlement in the first instance per year of settlement table . settlement by the most serious crime per year of settlement table . sentence imposed for the most serious crime per year of settlement table . average term of custodial sentences in days per year of settlement table . appeal lodged per year of settlement in the first instance table b . countries of origin of possible victims registered by the stv per annum table b . countries of birth of possible victims in ikp s per annum table b . standard deviations with table . table b . nationalities of suspects of thb per annum table b . countries of birth of suspects of thb per annum table b . countries of origin of victims per annum table b . countries of birth of suspects per year of registration abbreviations used bnrm bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings cbs centraal bureau voor de statistiek statistics netherlands cfi criminal financial investigation ciu central intelligence unit coa centraal orgaan opvang asielzoekers central agency for the reception of asylum seekers cso community service order ecpat end child prostitution child pornography and the trafficking of children for sexual pur poses eu european union gsm mobile phone iem informatie eenheid mensenhandel trafficking in human beings information unit ikp s informatie knooppunt politie systeem police information node system ind immigratie en naturalisatiedienst immigration and naturalisation service klpd korps landelijke politie diensten national police agency n number n a not applicable nam nationaal actieplan mensenhandel national action plan for trafficking in human beings nb nota bene nri nationale recherche informatie national crime investigation agency nrm nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm first report by the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm second report by the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm third report by the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings ppm dnp projectgroep prostitutie mensenhandel de nederlandse politie national police project on prostitution and trafficking in human beings pps public prosecution service sd standard deviation siba statistische informatievoorziening en beleidsanalyse statistical data supply and policy analysis unit stv stichting tegen vrouwenhandel foundation against trafficking in women thb trafficking in human beings tk tweede kamer lower house of parliament unicef united nations children s fund wodc wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documentatiecentrum scientific research and documenta tion centre introduction in mid the third report of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings na tionaal rapporteur mensenhandel nrm was published. besides quantitative data up to and including the year this report contained background information and more than rec ommendations for improving the way trafficking in human beings hereinafter abbreviated to thb should be tackled. one of the recommendations was to draw up a national action plan for trafficking in human beings nationaal actieplan mensenhandel nam . such a plan has indeed been produced. in december the nam was presented to the lower house. the nam is also the government s response to recommendations in the third report. at the time of completing this fourth report may the parliamentary debate on the third report and the nam has yet to be held. apart from the realisation of the nam a number of other developments in the area of combat ing thb are worth mentioning. for example the old article on thb in the criminal code ar ticle a which only covers exploitation in the sex industry was replaced on january by an article that covers all forms of thb article a appendix . this includes exploita tion in the sex industry exploitation in other sectors of work and services as well as certain ac tivities aimed at the removal of human organs. the b regulation has been modified in line with this and the field of work of the bureau of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings bnrm is expected to be broadened accordingly. one point of attention for bnrm is therefore to find out if and if so in which sectors and on what scale such modern forms of slavery occur. for this purpose bnrm has started up a study into other exploitation . unicef and ecpat are also conducting studies in this area specifically focusing on underage victims. chain partners in tackling thb face the task of remaining in a state of readiness and preparing themselves to assist the victims of other forms of exploitation as the need arises and to track down and prosecute the perpetrators. in order to inform and activate the chain partners bnrm together with the enforcement department of the ministry of justice organised a meet ing on this subject. in addition in the first half of the information point for youth prosti tution informatiepunt jeugdprostitutie was started up with transact and the expertise centre for trafficking in human beings human smuggling expertisecentrum mensenhandel mensen smokkel with the national crime squad. the efforts to improve the implementation of the b regulation in practice as well as the efforts of the public prosecution service pps in view of the recent broadening of legislation on thb also belong to this list of developments which is by no means exhaustive. but there are areas of concern too. for example in a number of subsidies to various public organisations that were active in the policy areas of prostitution and combating thb were withdrawn or reduced as a result of which important expertise has been lost or is in danger of being lost. another matter of concern is the fewer number of investigations into thb in that were successfully completed and also the fewer number of suspects arrested and referred for each investigation see chapter . in addition the national police project on prostitution and trafficking in human beings projectgroep prostitutie mensenhandel de nederlandse politie ppm dnp did not meet for a number of months and there are regular signs that in cer tain regions partly because of capacity problems there are no inspections or only sporadic ones taking place in sex establishments. it is therefore doubtful whether the fight against ex appendix to parliamentary papers tk no. . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur ploitation in the sex industry is indeed being given sufficient priority and capacity on a continu ous basis both in terms of administrative inspections by municipalities in the role of decentral ised government in the licensed sector as well as the investigative and prosecution efforts within and outside this sector for which also the central government bears responsibility. as has already been emphasised repeatedly in earlier reports administrative control is a crucial enforcement tool. crucial because the government s rationale behind distinguishing between the legalised sector without thb on the one hand and a thus increasingly more defined forbid den sector with an increased risk of thb on the other hand is otherwise undermined. provi sional figures show incidentally that the number of successfully completed investigations into thb in again increased significantly see appendix . enforcement both administrative and in criminal justice remains an important point also in the light of the above mentioned broadening of the definition of thb which in fact demands alertness to potential exploitation within a much broader range of work situations. this fourth report does not go into further detail regarding the abovementioned issues it fo cuses on additional quantitative information for the year concentrating on three areas namely the victims of thb that have reported to the foundation against trafficking in women stichting tegen vrouwenhandel stv investigations into thb and prosecutions brought by the police dealt with by the pps and settled in court . the figures are presented together with figures already published in previous reports for the years to inclusive in order to show any trends. chapter contains information on the victims of thb that have been reported to the stv. chapter concerns investigations carried out by the dutch police into cases of thb. chapter contains information on cases of thb registered with and handled by the pps and their settlement by the courts. chapter contains the summary. for this report information was made available by the stv and the police for which bnrm is most grateful. a separate word of thanks goes to peter paul groen of the statistical data supply and policy analysis unit statistische informatievoorziening en beleidsanalyse siba of the scientific research and documentation centre wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documenta tiecentrum wodc for the analyses of the pps s data and to onno stijger and suzanne bei jer for the contribution they made as apprentices in the police study. thanks are also due to alinde verhaag for her contribution as guest worker at bnrm. appendix contains a number of figures some of which are provisional for that have not been analysed fur ther. victims . introduction this chapter contains statistical data on possible victims of thb. it is information from the registration of the foundation against trafficking in women stichting tegen vrouwenhandel stv and information from the police s victim registration system. . victim registrations kept by the foundation against trafficking in women one of the stv s tasks is to register the victims of thb. this paragraph contains information on the victims registered by the stv in . only basic background details such as region and country of origin age sex and reporter are given. . . regions and countries of origin table . gives an overview of the regions of origin of the possible victims of thb that have been registered by the stv. table . origin of possible victims registered by the stv per annum region of origin total n n n n n central and eas tern europe africa asia latin america and caribbean western europe middle east unknown total source stv . victims were reported in significantly fewer than in and even the year that the stv was less readily accessible. incidentally this does not indicate the start of a new trend the number of reports increased substantially again in as shown in the appendix with the provisional figures for see appendix . in too most victims by far were from central and eastern europe. the number of reports from this region has remained virtually the same since from a relative point of view. the number of reports concerning victims originating from africa fluctuates somewhat but was again considerable in . table . contains the most common countries of origin of the victims reported. appendix table b . gives a complete overview of all countries of origin. the stv registration for deviates sharply from earlier years probably due to the poor accessibility of the stv at that time. countries are included that were the origin of at least victims in the period from to or at least five in . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur table . most common countries of origin of possible victims registered by the stv per annum country total n n n n n albania brazil bulgaria cameroon china czech republic guinea lithuania moldova netherlands nigeria poland romania russian fed. sierra leone thailand ukraine other unknown total source stv file for . just as in bulgaria was the most frequently occurring country of origin in . romania occupies the second place in that year as the origin of an increasing number of victims. the number of victims from nigeria fluctuates but was slightly lower in than in . a sudden and strikingly large number of victims from brazil were registered in . . . age and gender table . contains the age distribution of the victims reported to the stv from to . table . age distribution of victims reported to the stv per annum age total n n n n to years to years to years to years to years years and older unknown total source stv . a total of underage victims were reported to the stv in which is less than in previous years. if we do not include victims whose age is unknown the percentage of underage victims declined from in and to in . most victims come in the age category of to years old and this applies to all the years studied. victims no men or boys were reported in . . . the reporters table . provides an overview of the number of reports by various categories of reporters in the period from to . table . reporters of victims per annum reporter total n n n n police reception facility individuals refugee asylum organisations youth assistance organisations legal services assistance organisations victim himself herself healthcare fieldwork anonymous other total source stv . most victims registered by the stv are reported by the police. in this was almost two thirds of all reports. other reports were received from private individuals reception facilities refugee asylum organisations assistance organisations and more occasionally other organi sations or persons. . possible victims in the police information node system in principle all regional polices forces register all victims or possible victims of thb in the victim registration system known as the police information node system informatie knoop punt politie systeem ikp s . some of these victims come to light when carrying out adminis trative inspections in the prostitution sector while others come in contact with the police in other ways such as by approaching the police themselves. in order to establish whether someone is possibly a victim of thb a list of signals is used with each signal being assigned a number of points. at a score of points or more the possi ble victim is registered in ikp s.nrm the police monitor for prostitution and trafficking in human beings ppm dnp showed that five of the twenty five regional police forces did not register any possible victims in ikp s. e.g. prostitutes brothel owners clients friends and partners. from onwards no reports are registered as anonymous . in and the stv helpdesk always asked which category the reporter belonged to. e.g. public organisations migrant organisations associations foundations and local initiatives. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur concerning ikp s the following remarks are relevant it is not always clear whether police forces that do register possible victims in ikp s are consistent in this. some forces for example register few victims when one would actually expect more based on the size of the force and the prostitution sector within the region concerned. not only possible victims are registered in the victim registration system but some times suspected and unsuspected relations of the victims as well. registration in the system is not easy nor is the prevention of double entries and trac ing of victims. victims often work under different names and the names of foreign vic tims are not always spelt in a consistent manner. . . country of birth table . gives an overview of the most common countries of birth of possible victims regis tered in ikp s. an overview of all countries of birth can be found in appendix table b . . table . most common countries of birth of possible victims in ikp s per annum country of birth total n n n albania bulgaria hungary liberia lithuania netherlands nigeria poland romania russian federation sierra leone sudan ukraine other unknown total in the year the police registered possible victims in ikp s significantly fewer than in when possible victims were entered in the system. potential explanations for this relate to technical problems when entering information in ikp s a reduced motivation to regis ter the victim a decline in the number of victims in the licensed segment of the sex industry and possibly also less police effort given to prostitution inspections and investigations into thb. relatively speaking most victims in both and originate from bulgaria and to a lesser extent romania. in addition the netherlands and nigeria scored relatively highly in as countries of origin. the percentage of victims born in the netherlands compared to increased sharply. lower numbers may however also be a reflection of a cleaner licensed sector where inspections are indeed made but few victims are found or to the decline in the number of inspections or other police activity in tackling thb. those countries are included from which at least victims came in the years and together or at least in the year . victims . . age and gender table . contains the age distribution of possible victims registered in ikp s. table . age distribution of possible victims in ikp s age total n n n to years to years to years years and older unknown total in underage persons were registered as possible victims whereas in there were . in both years they accounted for of possible victims. with regard to the other age categories too the percentages in both years are virtually the same. most victims come in the category of to years. in two men were registered in ikp s. both were born in ecuador and are and years old respectively. further analysis by the trafficking in human beings information unit informatie eenheid mensenhandel iem showed that these are both transsexuals who were found in a streetwalker s zone. both were residing illegally in the netherlands. in men were registered in ikp s. twelve of them were underage and all came from various countries outside the european union. investigation . introduction each year bnrm analyses all successfully completed investigations into thb. an explanation of the study method can be found in appendix . this chapter contains the results for the year . . investigations into trafficking in human beings table . contains an overview of all investigations into thb completed and referred to the public prosecution service pps each year also showing the extent of the rise or fall in the number of investigations compared to the base year with indices . the results in table . have also been subdivided according to the type of thb cross border or domestic. in the case of cross border thb victims are recruited abroad whereas with domestic thb they are recruited in the netherlands. in both cases they are exploited in the netherlands among other countries in prostitution. table . investigations into thb completed each year according to thb type year cross border thb domestic thb total n index n index n index total n a n a n a the number of completed investigations into thb rose sharply from onwards but was lower in the year than in the two preceding years. of all the investigations completed in concerned domestic and cross border thb. these percentages have remained virtually the same for the last three years studied. reason for the investigation for the period from to was examined what the direct reason was for the investiga tion into thb. table . contains the result. the investigations were carried out by the police and the royal military constabulary. for an explanation of the indices see appendix . if victims are originally recruited abroad but sold on in the netherlands or recruited once again e.g. after having worked independently for a time in prostitution their case is categorised as cross border thb. a combination of cross border and domestic thb occurred twice in the cases investigated in and in . in the first case the victims were predominantly recruited in the netherlands but occasionally in belgium as well. this investigation was categorised as domestic thb. in the second case the victims were recruited largely in hungary but also in the netherlands. this investigation was categorised as cross border thb. incidentally in the year the number of completed investigations into thb was already higher than in previous years see earlier reports of the nrm presenting figures from onwards . the percentages of investigations into domestic thb per annum as a percentage of the number of investigations in that year and . this data was not collected for the year and part of . in view of its renewed relevance the question has been included again. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur table . reason for investigation per annum reason total n n n n report inspection in prostitution sector other investigation ciu information other total in spontaneous reports were relatively often the basis of investigations into thb. the number of investigations following reasons other than those mentioned category other rose in the years studied. in these were often reports by witnesses. for example they reported the fact that women were locked up or forced to prostitute themselves or incidents of violence. one report of thb came from the immigration and naturalisation service immigratie en naturalisatiedienst ind and one from the royal military constabulary. one investigation was also started up following a report by acquaintances of a suspect who reported that he was acting as a loverboy . the reason for investigations into domestic thb differs significantly from those for investiga tions into cross border thb. with domestic thb a report is more often the direct reason than with cross border thb compared to . with cross border thb checks are more of ten the reason compared to . . suspects table . contains information per annum on the number of suspects of thb that were identi fied arrested and referred to the pps in successful investigations. the indices show the devel opment in the number of identified suspects. in addition the proportion of the identified sus pects that were arrested and referred are also given in percentages . table . suspects of thb per annum year suspects identified suspects arrested suspects referred n index n n total n a percentage of the number of suspects identified in the year concerned. in the successful investigations completed in the police identified suspects of thb arrested suspects and referred suspects to the pps. the number of suspects arrested and referred in was lower than in the two preceding years and comparable with the level in . chi . df p . . the actual number of identified and arrested suspects is probably higher because there may have been suspects identified as such and arrested in investigations that are in progress or have been halted. incidentally in the number of suspects in all categories was higher than in previous years see second report which presents the figures from onwards . investigation in the rest of this paragraph arrested suspects will be referred to. table . contains an overview of the average number of arrested suspects in each investiga tion divided into the type of thb cross border or domestic . table . average number of suspects in each investigation each year and by thb type year cross border thb domestic thb total n average n average n average . . . . . . . . . . . . total . . . the average number of suspects arrested in each investigation fell further in . this fall applies more to investigations into cross border thb than to investigations into domestic thb. the average number of suspects arrested in investigations into domestic thb however is lower in all years than in investigations into cross border thb. gender the majority of the arrested suspects are male. however almost a quarter of the suspects ar rested from to are women. the percentage of women among the suspects fell in the year but rose again in . the female suspects arrested are mostly engaged in cross border thb of the women arrested from to . nationality table . shows the nationality of the suspects divided according to the year in which the in vestigation was completed. only the most common nationalities are contained in the table in order of declining frequency. a table with the nationality of all suspects is to be found in ap pendix table b . . table . most common nationalities of suspects of thb per annum nationality total n n n n n dutch romanian bulgarian turkish nigerian ukrainian albanian german belgian yugoslavian russian moroccan czech for the standard deviations see appendix table b . . in the period from to the percentages were and respectively. only countries of which a total of six or more suspects were nationals in the period from to are included in the table. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur nationality total n n n n n moldovan other unknown total the dutch romanian and bulgarian nationalities formed the top three in . in that year the number of suspects of romanian nationality rose markedly. on the other hand after a peak in the number of arrested suspects of albanian nationality fell sharply . the number of nigerian suspects was also low in as it was in too compared to previous years. country of birth table . contains an overview in order of declining frequency of the most common countries of birth of the suspects divided according to the year in which the investigation was com pleted. a table with the countries of birth of all suspects is included in appendix table b . . table . most common countries of birth of suspects of thb per annum country of birth total n n n n n netherlands romania bulgaria turkey surinam nigeria ukraine dutch antilles albania belgium germany former yugoslavia lithuania morocco russian federation ghana indonesia moldova czech republic other unknown total also when one examines the countries of birth of the suspects the netherlands romania and bulgaria were the top three in and the rise in the number of suspects from romania and the fall in the number of suspects from albania is particularly striking. compared to the over view of nationalities the number of suspects from a turkish or surinamese background is greater. their share grew compared to previous years. only countries in which a total of six or more suspects were born in the period from to have been in cluded in the table. investigation table . shows in order of declining frequency the most common countries of birth of sus pects for the total period from to here divided into type of thb cross border or domestic . table . most common countries of birth of suspects according to type of thb to country of birth cross border thb domestic thb total n n n netherlands bulgaria albania turkey nigeria romania former yugoslavia morocco surinam ukraine dutch antilles russian fed. belgium ghana germany indonesia moldova lithuania czech republic other unknown total almost all of the suspects born in morocco and the dutch antilles and respectively were suspected of domestic thb. this applies to of the suspects born in surinam. one can clearly see that in the period to a relatively large number of suspects born in former yugoslavia ukraine and to a lesser extent albania were suspected of domestic thb. suspects originating from other foreign countries are mostly or exclusively suspected of cross border thb. residence status the residence status of suspects of non dutch nationality was examined for the years to . this shows that of the suspects in were residing legally in the netherlands at the time of their arrest usually by virtue of a residence permit visa or a visa free period . almost two thirds of suspects of non dutch nationality in that year were therefore in the netherlands illegally at that time. the number of foreign suspects that were residing illegally in the netherlands rose strongly in the period to from in to in in and in . only countries in which a total of six or more suspects were born in the period to are included in the ta ble. those who remain in the netherlands during the visa free period come from countries without a visa obligation e.g. former candidate member states of the eu . they may remain in the netherlands without a visa for between and months depending on the country of origin. the visa free period is cancelled incidentally as soon as a criminal offence is committed. n not possible to find out for all suspects of non dutch nationality . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur proprietors among the suspects arrested in were proprietors of sex establishments of these ran licensed sex establishments unlicensed sex establishments and establishments which in the guise of a different business activity were also engaged in running sexual services two turkish cafes and one beauty salon . twenty one of them were referred to the pps. these percentages remained virtually unchanged from onwards. as well as prosecuting proprietors in criminal proceedings it is also possible to impose admin istrative measures sanctions . for this purpose a report must be made to the municipality that a licensed proprietor is a suspect in a criminal investigation. in of the suspected pro prietors of licensed establishments were reported to the municipality in one case this still had to be done. in so far as known to the police also administrative proceedings have been initi ated against of these proprietors. against proprietors this has led also in so far as known to the police to administrative sanctions. these numbers may yet rise because the team leaders of investigations completed do not always know whether an administrative process has al ready been initiated. table . shows the extent to which assumptions of involvement in thb have nevertheless arisen concerning proprietors who emerged in the investigations completed in and also including the proprietors who were not officially regarded as suspects . for this purpose just as in the third report of the nrm three categories of possible involvement have been used. table . level of awareness of proprietors according to the police and possible involvement total n n n proprietor ignorant proprietor is aware proprietor is active as trafficker total the results for show a completely different picture to that for . for example a rela tively higher number of proprietors in were categorised as traffickers in human beings and significantly fewer proprietors as aware but not actively cooperating . the percentage of proprietors that in the opinion of those persons interviewed were unaware of thb remained more or less the same. a total of sex establishments were involved in the successfully completed investigations into thb of which were unlicensed. in this figure was of which were unlicensed. in proprietors were arrested and referred in were arrested and referred whereas were arrested and referred in . over the entire period from to proprietors were arrested and were referred . the proprietor is not aware of the fact that victims are being exploited. the proprietor is indeed aware of this but does not actively cooperate. these are usually proprietors who act as if it was none of their concern they profit from the supply of new girls but often do not earn more from them than from legal prostitutes. the proprie tor plays an active role in parts of the thb process. the proceeds are higher than usual for these brothel owners because they take more of the victims earnings than the customary . in a few cases an establishment had more than one proprietor and or owner. in these cases for each establishment the proprietor who comes under the most serious category of involvement is included in the table. investigation . methods adopted by traffickers in human beings . . recruitment the thb process nearly always begins with recruiting press ganging or kidnapping victims in the netherlands or abroad this paragraph goes on to refer to all these cases as recruiting . cross border thb recruiters tracked down with cross border thb not all those persons involved in thb are identified and or tracked down or prosecuted. the recruiters in particular often remain out of reach.nrm table . shows the extent to which recruiters are arrested in completed investigations into cross border thb. table . arrests of recruiters in cross border thb per annum recruiters arrested total n n n n n all some none total in as in the percentage of investigations into cross border thb whereby as far as is known all recruiters were arrested was much higher than in previous years. in half of the investigations all the recruiters were arrested and some of them in a further fifth of the investi gations. it would therefore appear that recruiters have managed to keep out of reach to a lesser extent in the past few years. even so in more than a quarter of the cases no recruiter at all was arrested. buying and selling victims and middlemen as far as is known in of all cases completed in victims were sold on . this per centage fluctuated widely in the total period under study. another phenomenon relates to the middlemen these persons buy and sell victims without bringing them into the sex industry themselves. in investigations in persons came to light that were working exclusively as middlemen while in this number rose to and in it fell again to . . . travel and residence documents table . shows for the investigations concerning cross border thb the extent to which the victims were in possession of a valid or fake passport. since a single investigation may in volve various victims bearing different identify documents the table does not add up to . investigations into domestic thb have not been included here because the recruiters are virtually always arrested in such investigations. these are in fact the same persons as those who bring victims into prostitution and exploit them.nrm and . percentages were and . this was not studied in the year and earlier. a fake passport is understood to mean one that is fake i.e. forged as well as a passport in which information has been changed or which is used improperly. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur table . passport of victims per annum passport total n n n n n genuine valid fake forged none in most of the cases of cross border thb completed in one or more victims had a valid passport. the percentage of investigations whereby victims possessed a fake passport fell fur ther in . however in almost one third of the cases in one or more victims had a fake passport. in both and roughly half of the fake passports showed the nationality of an eu member state. fake visas are used less frequently they were not found in any of the investigations in . . . putting victims to work in the sex industry type of sex work it was examined which type of sex work the victims in investigations completed in were expected to carry out. in all investigations prostitution was involved. two involved sex enter tainment and one investigation concerned a case where victims were also used for making pornography. prostitution sectors victims of thb may be put to work in various sectors of prostitution such as window prostitu tion clubs brothels private homes the escort sector and street prostitution. table . shows which prostitution sectors were involved in the cases of thb that were investigated. since vic tims may be put to work in several sectors the percentages do not add up to . table . prostitution sectors involved per annum prostitution sector total n n n n n window prostitution clubs brothels escort street prostitution other in the number of investigations that concerned window and club prostitution declined. the number of investigations focusing on the escort sector remained relatively constant whereas the number of investigations into street prostitution increased relatively slightly. businesses that also engage in running sexual services in the guise of another type of business are included in table . in the category other . in as in these involved prostitu tion in turkish cafes. in addition in victims were prostituted in a beauty salon. this information could not be ascertained for all the years. the number of investigations for which this is known is and total . and respectively. the starting point here is the eu before the accession of ten new countries on may . such as pole dancing and striptease. in two investigations in and in two investigations in . investigation means of coercion traffickers in human beings use all kinds of means of coercion to bring women into prostitu tion to keep them there and or to take their earnings. table . gives an overview. since traf fickers may use several means of coercion the table does not add up to . table . means of coercion per annum methods of force total n n n n n threat of physical violence watch lock victim up fictitious debt violence physical confiscation of passport threats of violence towards victim s family threat of disclosing sex work feigned love voodoo in all the years studied the threat of violence plays an important role in bringing victims into prostitution and keeping them there as well as keeping them under watch and or locking them up and imposing debts on them. the first means of coercion is used in both cross border and domestic thb whereas the latter two methods are used above all with cross border thb. the rise observed in in the number of investigations concerning the use by loverboys of feigned love to get victims into prostitution did not persist into . however this method is once again not used exclusively with domestic thb. both in and nine investigations involved drug use by victims. it was examined for to what extent this drug use was voluntary. according to the police in of the cases this was indeed so. in victims were raped by the traffickers in cases . earnings for victims not all victims are physically forced to do their work. sometimes they are only forced to hand over part of their money. in those cases completed in it was examined how often victims themselves keep any money from their work in prostitution. this is usually based on their own statements. of the cases in in which traffickers confiscated money there were in which the victims were allowed or able to keep some of the money. in two thirds of the cases the victims had to hand over everything. mobility victims of thb are usually put to work in more than one place often outside the nether lands.nrm table . shows in which countries outside the netherlands and the country of ori of the cases in in which this method was used concerned cross border and concerned domestic thb. in this was in of such cases of domestic thb and in cases of cross border thb. in the figures were and respectively. sometimes traffickers tell victims that the money is being saved for them or transferred to their families. because traffickers act as if they are really doing so van dijk et al it is assumed if no proof of this is found that all the money is confiscated. in some cases it is unknown whether and how much of the earnings will be taken for example because victims have not yet been working in prostitution. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur gin the victims have worked in prostitution according to the investigations. the numbers in the table concern the number of investigations and not the number of victims. table . countries where victims are put to work per annum put to work outside the netherlands total n n n n n no yes germany belgium italy spain france switzerland other countries the percentage of investigations whereby victims were brought into prostitution outside the netherlands as well fell further in . victims that were brought into prostitution elsewhere most often also ended up in germany. other countries that scored relatively highly in were belgium and italy. in the period from to victims of cross border thb were brought into prostitution outside the netherlands and outside the country of origin more often than victims of domestic thb. victims of domestic thb are predominantly put to work in the neighbouring countries of germany and belgium while victims of cross border thb are also put to work in other countries. . . criminal collaboration thb is sometimes carried out by persons working alone but more often by groups. this sub paragraph deals with the criminal organisational forms that are found in thb. types of collaboration as already mentioned in previous nrm reports three forms of criminal organisation can be distinguished the solo operator the isolated criminal group and the criminal networks. the table includes only the countries that appear in this context in four or more investigations in the period from to . n and total . the other countries are aruba turkey united kingdom surinam poland ghana albania austria en bosnia herzegovina. in of the investigations into cross border thb from to it emerges that the victims as far as is known were brought into prostitution elsewhere too and in of the investigations into domestic thb. this difference is significant chi . df p . . a single person exploits one or more girls. although many pimps know each other and also discuss things to gether these are one man bands . sometimes the pimp is helped by an accomplice who plays a very marginal role. for example a pimp may ask someone to keep an eye on the victim while he goes out for a moment. a group with at least two principal perpetrators nrm and a maximum of five members who are responsible for the entire thb process and which has no demonstrable contacts with other groups of persons involved in thb. with cross border thb the members of the group collect the victims from abroad themselves such as through a mem ber of the family of the principal perpetrator or partner living abroad. the number of perpetrators involved is at least six but often much higher. this typical group often meets the de scription of criminal macro networks as described in the study by klerks p. in this undifferentiated criminal infrastructure in principal everyone is linked to everyone else through one or more intermediaries. there investigation table . shows the organisational forms as they emerge from the investigations that have been completed and referred . table . criminal organisations of thb per annum organisational form total n n n n n solo operator isolated group network total there was a slight relative increase in the number of investigations focusing on parts of net works in however it did not reach the level of the years before .nrm one third of the investigations completed in focused on solo operators. table . concerns an analysis of thb investigations. if one looks at the suspects in these in vestigations it can be seen that over the entire study period of the suspects arrested form part of a network of an isolated group and are solo operators. this division can be found in general terms in all the years studied. of the solo operators the majority are involved in domestic thb whereas for the iso lated groups this figure is . virtually all criminal networks are involved in cross border thb. . victims in investigations . . reports table . contains an overview of the number of victims who reported an offence or made a witness statement divided by year and type of thb cross border or domestic . this only con cerns the investigations referred to the pps victims reporting an offence whose case was not taken up or completed are not shown here. table . reports made by victims of thb by year and type of thb year cross border thb domestic thb total n average n average n average . . . are however clear clusters based on geographical proximity family ties friendships trade links and mutually re lated activities . in the case of thb clusters develop around recruitment in specific countries the transport to the netherlands i.e. the middlemen and the prostitution of victims in one or more countries cities. victims are bought and sold on and often recruited and or put to work in more than one country. in this classification it concerns not the number of suspects but the number of persons involved. the organisation type could not be ascertained for two investigations in and one investigation in . the percentage of suspects who formed part of a criminal network an isolated group or acted as a solo operator re spectively were . sd and n respectively . and . and . and . and . and total . sd and n respectively . and . and . and . and . and total . sd and n respectively . and . and . and . and . and total . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur year cross border thb domestic thb total n average n average n average . total . and witness statements. in the total number of reports and witness statements in successfully completed investiga tions was . this is a sharp fall compared to the year and to a lesser extent the year . the average number of reports witness statements in each investigation also fell. the av erage number of reports witness statements in all years is higher in cross border than in domes tic thb. . . minors table . contains an overview of the number of investigations where one or more underage victims were involved. the information is divided by the year in which the investigations were completed and by type of thb. table . investigations involving underage victims by year and type of thb year cross border thb domestic thb total n n n total percentage of the total number of investigations into the type of thb concerned in the year concerned. percentage of the total number of investigations in the year concerned. in also underage victims were involved in one third of the investigations into thb. this percentage is higher than in the previous year but lower than in and . for the year it was examined how many minors were involved in investigations. the in vestigations that were completed in that year came across underage victims of which re ported the offence. in investigations into domestic thb underage victims are involved much more often than in investigations into cross border thb compared to . this is the case in each of the years studied. . . countries of origin table . contains in order of declining frequency an overview of the most common coun tries of origin of the victims whom the investigations came across. in the table n refers to the number of investigations and not the number of victims. an overview of all countries of origin is included in appendix table b . . since victims from several countries may be involved in a single investigation the table does not add up to . these may not necessarily have reported an offence or made a witness statement. chi . df p . . percentages per annum for domestic and cross border thb respectively and and and and . i.e. countries that were registered in the period from to as countries of origin in ten or more investiga tions. investigation table . most common countries of origin of victims per annum countries of origin total n n n n n bulgaria netherlands romania hungary poland nigeria russian fed. lithuania ukraine moldova in as in bulgaria was the most frequently occurring country of origin of victims in successfully completed investigations. there was however a sharp rise in the number of investi gations where the victims were from romania. the number of investigations involving nige rian victims was low in and compared to the previous years. taking all the countries of origin into consideration there were a relative large number of vic tims from the balkans in the investigations completed in as was also the case in . in addition many victims were recruited in the netherlands. there was a relative decline in the number of investigations involving recruitment in eastern europe and the baltic states . country of origin without visa requirement it was examined to what extent in investigations into cross border thb the victims come from countries with or without a visa requirement. for this purpose the visa status of the countries of origin at the start of the investigation was taken. the result is shown for each year in table . . this table distinguishes between investigations whereby recruitment takes place in coun tries with a visa requirement countries without a visa requirement and in both. table . countries of origin with and without visa requirement per annum countries of origin total n n n n n without visa requirement with visa requirement without and with visa requirement total three quarters of the investigations into cross border thb completed in involved victims from countries without a visa requirement. this is a marked rise compared to previous years. countries of former yugoslavia croatia yugoslavian federation serbia and montenegro bosnia herzego vina macedonia and slovenia as well as romania bulgaria and albania. russian federation ukraine moldova belarus azerbaijan and georgia. estonia latvia and lithuania. nb this table only includes the investigations whereby recruitment also took place abroad. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur . investigation methods and process . . investigation methods used table . contains an overview of the investigation methods used in completed investigations into thb in order of declining frequency. questions on this were only asked for the years and . for the year the questions were more detailed so that the results from these two years are not entirely comparable. incidentally the question was also asked whether a financial criminal investigation was carried out. the results concerning financial criminal investigations are discussed in the following paragraph. table . investigation methods used and investigation methods total n n n suspect interviews x x x x victim interviews x x x x police information x x x x witness investigation x x x x technical investigation x x x x observation telephone gsm tapping obtaining details of post telephone and fax communication x x x x requests for legal assistance other targeted searches for police knowledge and information in files. e.g. interviewing witnesses such as colleague prostitutes or proprietors. e.g. searches house searches confiscation collection of forensic material. x not studied or not studied for both years and therefore unknown. the results for the year correspond in general terms and in so far as comparable with the results for . however a relatively larger number of requests for legal assistance were submitted in . . . financial aspects a financial criminal investigation is where specific attention is given to identifying the profits obtained through crime and the way in which these could be confiscated. this implies the use of financial and administrative tools and assessing investigation information from a financial and technical point of view. based on financial investigation it may be decided during or after such an investigation to cal culate the perpetrators illegally obtained benefit and to try to confiscate this benefit. in order to do so first a criminal financial investigation cfi is carried out. table . shows how often financial investigations were made in the investigations into thb studied how often a cfi was opened and how often this in so far as already known to the police led to a confiscation procedure. information about criminal financial investigations has been collected from onwards. in a number of cases it was still under consideration whether or not to open a cfi and or to institute confiscation proceedings. these cases are not included in the table. investigation table . financial investigation and confiscation per annum year financial investigation criminal financial investigation confiscation proceedings n n n x x x x total percentage of the total number of investigations in the year concerned for which this is known. percentage of the number of cfis in the year concerned. x not studied. in almost half of the investigations into thb according to those interviewed a financial investigation was carried out. in the relative number of investigations in which a criminal financial investigation was carried out was just as high. in almost one quarter of the investigations a cfi was opened in . this percentage is a little lower than in previous years. the percentage of investigations whereby the cfi resulted in the calculation of illegally obtained benefit and in so far as already known to the police confis cation proceedings was much lower in the year than in previous years. the persons inter viewed would appear to be increasingly not always aware of this because financial investiga tions are also carried out by other specialist departments and agencies. illegally obtained benefit the illegally obtained benefit for the five suspects in for whom this has been calculated and is known is almost rounded off . on average the illegally obtained benefit per suspect in the year studied is rounded off . the average illegally obtained benefit per suspect varies from year to year and was in in in and in . claim from victims for compensation it was examined whether victims have made an attempt through civil proceedings or through a joinder of the injured party in criminal proceedings to recover some of the money they earned or to obtain compensation for damage actually incurred. this was found in so far as known to be so in cases in . in there were cases cases in and cases in . total number of investigations per annum for which the following information is known financial investigation and total cfi and total confis cation and total . in view of the importance of financial investigations bnrm decided to collect further information on this subject. the results will be discussed in a subsequent report. sd and n respectively . . . . and . total . the public prosecution service and prosecution . introduction this chapter contains the results of secondary analyses of thb cases within the public prose cutor s national database for the period to . per year it was examined how many cases were registered with the public prosecution service pps were dealt with by the depart ment or were settled in court i.e. no cohort was followed . the explanation of the research methods used can be found in appendix . . thb cases registered with the public prosecution service during the period from to criminal cases in which suspicion of thb article ter or article a of the criminal code was solely or partly the case were registered with the pps. a criminal case in the context of prosecution is understood to mean the case against a single suspect. table . shows for each year how many cases it concerns and how many of these cases in so far as is known also involved underage victims. table . number of cases registered and cases that also involve underage victims per annum year registered cases cases that also involve underage victims n n total the considerable increase in the number of registered cases that was seen in did not con tinue into . the number in was however still significantly higher than in the first two years of this century. both the number and the proportion of cases that also involved underage victims increased in compared to the two previous years. over the total period from to more than of the number of cases also involved underage victims. nb this says nothing about the number of underage victims involved. this was carried out by siba wodc. it therefore does not concern exactly the same cases each time because not all cases are registered dealt with by the pps and settled in court in the same year. including cases that were later dropped by the pps or in which the charge ultimately does not contain a suspicion of thb. criterion registration under paragraphs and subparagraphs of the thb provision in the criminal code that imply underage victims. however underage victims may well come under different paragraphs and subparagraphs of this provision so this is almost certain to be an underestimate of their numbers. including cases transferred to another district a total of in this period . this is one less than was found in earlier analyses of this same year and than reported in the previous report. the difference is caused by small shifts in numbers that are the result of corrections in pps data after the reference date of the earlier analyses. since consistent use has been made of the new analyses for this report there are a few small differences with earlier reports. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur a division by paragraphs within the thb provision in the criminal code gives the following results in table . . table . type of thb per year of registration type thb total n n n n n ter a paragraph ter a paragraph ter a paragraph total the vast majority of thb cases concern article a or ter paragraph i.e. thb whereby two or more persons act in association or a victim is involved who is younger than years or serious physical injury is inflicted. cases that are registered under article ter or a para graph also occur but in the period of four years under study no case at all was registered un der article ter a paragraph . the crime of thb is often committed in combination with other offences such as people smuggling attempted rape or complicity in rape possession or use of weapons attempted deliberate deprivation of liberty or complicity in such and offences to do with drugs making and using fake or forged travel documents abuse and threats.nrm a case may therefore con cern several offences. table . gives an overview of the most serious offences in each case. this categorisation adopted by statistics netherlands centraal bureau voor de statistiek cbs whereby the of fence with the most severe punishment will take precedence has been modified for this pur pose in the sense that a separate category has been created for thb under the cbs s categori sation thb comes in the category of other crimes and in the case of a combination of crimes bearing equal punishment thb is taken as the most serious crime and included in the over view. table . most serious crime per year of registration most serious crime total n n n n n sexual violence other violence offences against property vandalism public order thb ter a paragraph thb ter a paragraph other offences under the criminal code total this could be regarded as the simplest form of thb not committed in association with others no victims younger than years involved and no serious physical injury inflicted. this qualification however does not detract in any way from the seriousness of the crime in itself. should there still be several crimes with the same punishment a crime registered earlier will take precedence. e.g. thb in combination with fraud corruption of a public official making false charges bigamy getting an un derage person drunk or withdrawal of an underage person from parental authority.nrm the public prosecution service and prosecution in thb was the only or the most serious crime in of the cases registered. the other cases involved an even more serious crime besides thb usually a form of sexual violence such as indecent assault or rape. if one looks at the total period from to thb is the only or the most serious crime registered in of cases. in most cases it involves article ter a paragraph . the increase identified in the previous report in the number of cases in which article ter a paragraph forms the most serious crime did not continue. it could be added here that in of the cases participation in a criminal organisation was also registered. considering the above the thb cases registered would seem to have become more serious in nature increase in the proportion of cases under article ter a paragraph compared to ar ticle ter a paragraph a rise in the proportion of cases where an underage victim is also involved and compared to and a rise in the proportion of cases in which participa tion in a criminal organisation is also involved. . the suspects age in of the cases registered in the age of the suspects at the time of the first thb of fence was between and years. their average age was years and there were under age suspects . country of origin the suspects come from more than countries. table . contains in alphabetical order the most common countries of origin. see table b . in appendix for a complete overview. table . most common countries of birth of suspects per year of registration country of birth total n n n n n albania bulgaria czechoslovakia iraq morocco netherlands nigeria romania former soviet union surinam turkey former yugo slavia in the years to this was and respectively. one and the same person may be suspected of several thb offences. sd . . in the years to this was and respectively. criterion for inclusion in one of the years at least five or in the entire period at least ten suspects who came from the country concerned. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur country of birth total n n n n n other unknown total once again in the netherlands is the most frequently occurring country of birth and the share of suspects born in the netherlands also increased in proportion. what is striking is the large proportion of suspects born in bulgaria romania and turkey each at least but of these three countries only the romanian share grew in . in addition the number of suspects from the former soviet union and surinam grew in that year the increase and substantial pro portion of albanian suspects identified in did not continue. table . contains for each year the ranking of the five most frequently occurring countries of birth of the suspects. table . ranking of most frequently occurring countries of birth of suspects by year of registration country total rank rank rank rank n rank netherlands romania bulgaria turkey former soviet union former yugoslavia albania nigeria morocco the overview shows a constant first place for the netherlands as the country of birth of sus pects and a relatively stable position of turkey and to a slightly lesser extent bulgaria and former yugoslavia. nigeria would seem to have become less important as a country of origin. gender most suspects are male in of cases in . however there are clear differences between the countries of origin. limited to the five most frequently occurring countries of origin of the suspects it is noticeable that among the turkish suspects there are hardly any women just one . of the romanian suspects are women. the other three most frequently occurring coun tries of origin occupy an intermediate position. . cases dealt with by the public prosecution service table . contains by year of registration an overview of the number of cases in which the sus pect was held in pre trial detention. an accent indicates a shared ranking. women among the dutch suspects and among suspects from the former soviet union to women among the bulgarian suspects. the public prosecution service and prosecution table . pre trial detention per year of registration pre trial detention total n n n n n yes no total in of the suspects were in pre trial detention at the moment the case was brought to court. this percentage has grown somewhat in the last three years. table . shows how the pps deals with cases. in the above it concerned each time the criminal cases registered in the period to . table . shows the cases that were dealt with by the pps in the same period. table . cases dealt with by the pps per year in which they were dealt with dealt with total n n n n n thb summons unconditional deci sion not to prosecute summons for other offences transfer joinder conditional decision not to prosecute out of court settlement total the number of cases dealt with is rising each year. the summons was once again in by far the most frequently used method. it was usually also thb summons of cases dealt with and sometimes summons solely for other offences of all cases dealt with . in of the cases it was decided unconditionally not to prosecute. these decisions were made above all be cause of the unlikelihood of a conviction technical dismissal . the other forms of completion transfer conditional decision not to prosecute and out of court settlement are only applied sporadically. . settlement by the court to recapitulate in the period from to cases were registered with the pps in which thb was also suspected. in the same period cases were dealt with by the pps as the difference is caused by the fact that the pps does not always take a decision to prosecute in the same year that the case is registered. summons only or also for thb. cases whereby despite earlier suspicions of thb ultimately no charge of thb was made. to another district or abroad. the ground for deciding not to prosecute technical dismissal is usually no legal evidence followed some way behind by wrongly reported as a suspect . minor share in the offence and old offence are the most common grounds for policy decisions not to prosecute policy dismissal . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur were a total of cases dealt with in the courts of the first instance in which thb was also the charge. table . gives an overview of the court decisions by year of settlement. table . settlement in the first instance per year of settlement settlement total n n n n n sentenced acquittal pps inadmissible joinder in court total in a sentence was imposed in the vast majority of the cases brought to court . of cases ended in an acquittal and an equal number of cases were joined in court. in one case the pps was inadmissible. table . gives an overview of the nature of the settlement by the most serious offence in the charge. table . settlement by the most serious crime per year of settlement judgement total most serious crime n n n n n sentenced pps n.a. sexual vio lence total sentenced other vio lence total sentenced vandalism public order total sentenced acquittal thb ter a paragraph total sentenced pps n.a. acquittal joinder thb ter a paragraph total sentenced acquittal other of fences under the criminal code total sentenced pps n.a. acquittal joinder total total not admissible. joinder in court. these are therefore not necessarily the same cases as those registered with the pps or dealt with by the pps during the same period. cases that were registered with the pps as also thb but in which the summons was issued for only other offences in the period from to there were cases are no longer included from now on. offences against property are not included in this overview because no charge was brought for this and or the court had not yet reached a judgement in such a case. the public prosecution service and prosecution a word of warning when interpreting this table for the sake of completeness percentages as well as figures are given. because of the far reaching subdivision however some cell combina tions are so low that the percentages are not very meaningful. what can be deduced from the ta ble however besides the concrete figures of course is the following in in all nine cases in which sexual violence was the most serious crime a sen tence was passed. this also occurred in of the cases where article a paragraph was the most serious crime and in of the cases for article a paragraph if one looks in the period from to at the cases in which article ter a paragraph was the most serious crime the percentage of cases ending in a sentence rises slightly over time. until recently the pps data contained only information on the nature of the settlement in rela tion to the summons and not in relation to the crimes for which a suspect was ultimately sen tenced. however this has changed slightly. although the registration of whether or not each of fence ends with a court conviction is not yet entirely flawless the information does show that in a significant number of cases in this would appear to be of the i.e. a sen tence did ensue but not for thb which was also one of the charges . the crimes for which a sentence was indeed imposed were sometimes in combination smuggling of human beings sexual abuse of underage persons rape abuse threat of violence forgery of documents or fake travel documents participation in a criminal organisation violation of the opium act and or violation of the weapons and ammunition act. table . gives an overview of the sentences imposed once again for the crime that carries the heaviest punishment. table . sentence imposed for the most serious crime per year of settlement total most serious crime sentence imposed n n n n n no princi pal sentence custodial sentence cso sexual violence total custodial sentence other vio lence total custodial sen tence offence against property total custodial sen tence vandalism public order total this is evident from a number of inconsistencies in the information. the cases in which ultimately no conviction of the crime of thb followed also form part of the overview. offences against property are lacking in this overview because no charge was brought for this and or the court had not yet reached a judgement in such a case. with cases in the category no principal sentence an additional penalty e.g. confiscation or an order e.g. hospi tal order may have been imposed. the term additional penalty incidentally is somewhat misleading. contrary to what the term seems to suggest the court may limit itself to imposing an additional penalty. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur total most serious crime sentence imposed n n n n n conditional principal sen tence custodial sen tence fine custodial sen tence fine cso custodial sen tence cso thb ter a paragraph total no princi pal sentence conditional principal sen tence custodial sen tence custodial sen tence fine cso cso fine fine custodial sen tence cso thb ter a paragraph total custodial sen tence other crimes under the criminal code total no principal sen tence conditional principal sen tence custodial sen tence custodial sen tence fine cso cso fine fine custodial sen tence cso total total community service order. because of the many empty cells some percentages are not very meaningful. what the table does make clear though apart from the concrete figures is the following the public prosecution service and prosecution in in of all cases in which whether or not in combination with another crime thb was involved and the court imposed a sentence a custodial sentence was imposed sometimes in combination with another sentence or order this percentage was somewhere between and annually in the period from to in in of all cases in which article ter a paragraph was the most serious crime and a sentence was imposed that sentence was a custodial sentence. table . gives for each crime combination the average duration of the custodial sentences imposed as well as the associated standard deviations. the total of cases in which other violence vandalism public order or other crimes under the criminal code were the most se rious crime have only been included in calculating the total bottom row of the table because the numbers are too small for separate averages or standard deviations to be calculated for them. table . average term of custodial sentences in days per year of settlement most serious crime average sd average sd average sd average sd sexual violence thb ter a para thb ter a para totalised in calculated for all cases in which thb was also involved a custodial sentence averag ing two years was imposed see bottom row of the table . the highest average custodial sen tence was imposed where sexual violence was the most serious crime days or more than four years . with thb article ter a paragraph as the most serious crime an average of more than months was imposed days and with thb article ter a paragraph as the most serious crime an average of almost months days . pps data contains only information on settlement in the first instance as well as on whether an appeal has been lodged in a case and by whom. table . gives an overview. table . appeal lodged per year of settlement in the first instance appeal lodged total n n n n n none by public prosecutor by suspect by both parties total the table shows that in an appeal was lodged in of the cases usually by the suspect. viewed over the period from to the number of appeals lodged by the public prose cutor was relatively high in . only a custodial sentence in of cases a custodial sentence plus fine in of cases and a custodial sentence plus community service order in of cases. only a custodial sentence in of cases a custodial sentence plus community service order in of cases and a custodial sentence and fine in of cases. these give an idea of the extent to which the term varies in the different cases for which an average has been calcu lated the higher the sd the greater the variation . for a further explanation see appendix . summary . introduction several developments in the area of combating thb since the publication of the previous re port are worth mentioning. for example the national action plan on thb was drawn up and the old article on thb article a in the criminal code that originally only covered exploita tion in the sex industry was replaced by article a that covers exploitation in the sex industry and exploitation in other sectors of work and services as well as certain activities focusing on the removal of human organs. the b regulation for victims witnesses has been modified in line with this and bnrm s field of work is expected to be broadened accordingly. in anticipa tion of this bnrm has started up a study into other exploitation in order to find out whether and if so in which sectors and on what scale such modern forms of slavery occur in the nether lands. in addition in the first half of an information centre for youth prostitution infor matiepunt jeugdprostitutie and in cooperation with the national crime squad the expertise centre for trafficking in human beings human smuggling expertisecentrum mensenhan del mensensmokkel were started up. efforts have also been made to improve the implementa tion of the b regulation in practice and the pps has set up three working groups in view of the recent broadening of thb legislation. there are matters of concern too though such as the reduction in subsidies for public organisa tions in the policy areas of prostitution and combating thb the fall in the number of success fully completed investigations into thb in and also the decline in the number of suspects arrested and referred in each investigation. in addition the national police project on prostitu tion and trafficking in human beings projectgroep prostitutie mensenhandel de nederlandse politie ppm dnp did not meet for several months and there are frequent signs that in certain regions partly due to capacity problems only sporadic inspections are made of sex establish ments. there is therefore some doubt whether the fight against exploitation in the sex industry is being given sufficient priority and capacity on a continuous basis both through the adminis trative inspections by the municipalities in the licensed sector as well as in investigations and prosecutions within and outside that sector. enforcement both administrative and criminal remains an important issue also in the light of the broadening of the definition of thb which requires watchfulness for potential exploitation within a much wider scale of work situations. this fourth report does not go further into the above mentioned issues it contains statistical data up to and including . this chapter contains the summary. the information concerning victims of thb that have been reported to the stv police investigations into thb prosecution by the pps and settlement in the courts is grouped under the headings of investigation prose cution victims and suspects. . investigation . . number and type of investigations the number of investigations into thb successfully completed by the police rose from in to in but fell in to . this fall concerned investigations into both cross border and domestic thb and the proportion of both types remained virtually the same in this appendix contains some provisional figures for the year . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur period in and respectively . the number of investigations focusing on win dow and club prostitution fell in compared to previous years. the proportion of investiga tions focusing on the escort sector remained virtually the same and the proportion of investiga tions into street prostitution rose slightly in . of the investigations in concerned parts of networks this is a slight rise compared to but does not reach the level of . just as in one third of the in vestigations in involved solo suspects whereas a quarter concerned isolated groups. . . reason for the investigations the reasons for investigations into domestic thb differ significantly from those for investiga tions into cross border thb. with domestic thb a report of an offence is much more fre quently the reason for an investigation than with cross border thb compared to . with cross border thb inspections are more often the reason compared to . the number of investigations for reasons other than those mentioned rose in the period from to . in these were often reports from witnesses. . . investigation methods used as well as the standard interviewing of suspects and victims in virtually all investigations successfully completed in information from police databases was used and witness inves tigations were carried out. in more than half of the investigations a technical investigation took place observations were made and or telecommunication methods were tapped or information from providers was requested. in one third of the investigations requests for legal assistance were made. . . financial aspects according to the police in a financial investigation was conducted in more than half of the investigations into thb. this applied in general terms for as well. the percentage of investigations in which a criminal financial investigation cfi was subsequently opened fell from about in the years to to almost a quarter in . there was a much sharper fall compared to previous years in the number of investigations whereby the cfi led to the calculation of illegally obtained benefit and confiscation proceedings. this percentage fell to and . the average amount of illegally obtained benefit calculated per suspect was a little less than in and varies widely from year to year more than in and more than in . the number of cases in which victims attempted to obtain compensation for material and immaterial loss suffered by them either through civil proceedings or as a joinder of the injured party also fluc tuated widely in this occurred in cases in the years to there were and cases respectively. incidentally provisional figures for show a sharp rise in the number of investigations completed successfully see appendix . summary . prosecution . . number and types of cases in there were suspects registered with the pps in which there was the suspicion only or partly of thb article ter or article a of the criminal code . the sharp rise in the number of registered cases that had been observed in therefore did not continue into but the number is still significantly higher than in the first two years of this century . both the number and the proportion of cases in that also con cern underage victims rose compared to to slightly above the level of . this how ever says nothing about the number of underage victims involved. during the last three years most of the thb cases concerned the second paragraph of the thb article concerned the first paragraph whereas during the past four years no case at all was registered under paragraph . thb was the only crime or the most serious crime in of the cases registered in . in the other cases there was an even more serious crime besides thb usually a form of sexual violence such as sexual assault or rape. these figures are comparable to those of the three previous years. . . cases dealt with by the public prosecution service in the pps dealt with cases in which thb was only or partly the case considerably more than in previous years . this resulted in a summons in by far the majority of cases in just as in previous years. in more than two thirds of cases this was a summons also for thb sometimes however only a summons for other crimes was is sued of all cases dealt with . more than one fifth of the cases were unconditionally dropped dismissal by reason of unlikely conviction . only occasionally were cases transferred conditionally dropped or settled out of court. . . trial and appeal the court in the first instance dealt with cases in in which thb was also a charge a larger number than in previous years . in the vast majority of these cases the court imposed a sentence in and in . com pared to these years in more than of the cases this was a custodial sentence. the average term of these custodial sentences was two years in if there was a charge of a more serious crime besides thb e.g. sexual violence the custodial sentence was considerably longer an average of more than four years . when the first paragraph of the thb provision was the most serious charge the custodial sentence was on average more than months and under para graph as the most serious charge almost months. of the cases in ended in an ac quittal less often than the previous years. similarly of cases were consolidated and in one case the pps was inadmissible. over the years an appeal has been lodged in slightly less than half of the thb cases judged in the first instance usually only by the suspect often also by the pps and only very occasionally by the pps alone. provisional figures show that the number of suspects registered with the pps rose once again in see appen dix . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur . victims . . victims registered with the stv victims were reported to the foundation against trafficking in women stichting tegen vrouwenhandel stv in significantly fewer than in and even fewer than in the year in which it was difficult to reach the stv. just as in previous years in most of the victims by far came from central and eastern europe with bulgaria followed by romania with an increasing number being the main countries of origin. the num ber of reports of victims originating from africa fell slightly but was still a considerable in with victims from nigeria accounting for the largest group. the other victims came from asia western europe and latin america and the caribbean in equal proportions with the growing number of victims from brazil being particularly striking. over the years most victims that have been reported to the stv are in the age category from to years and this was no different for . the number of underage victims reported to the stv to years was in that year fewer than in previous years . the number of victims whose age was unknown fell in to . stv received no reports of male victims in . . . victims in the ikp s victim registration system regional police forces register possible victims of thb in the ikp s victim registration sys tem. some of these victims emerged during administrative inspections in the prostitution sector while others came in contact with the police in other ways for instance because they themselves went to the police. this registration is not comprehensive. in the police registered possible victims in ikp s considerably less than in . in more than a fifth of these victims came from bulgaria and from romania. in addition the nether lands and nigeria had a relatively high score as countries of origin. the percentage of victims born in the netherlands rose strongly compared to from to . also most victims registered in ikp s are in the age category of to years. in mi nors were registered compared to in . as a proportion of the total this was in both years. as far as the other age categories are concerned the percentages in both years are also virtually the same. with regard to gender in two ecuadorian men were registered whereas in this was all originating from countries outside the european union eu . twelve of them were minors. . . victim information from the investigations numbers and countries of origin the number of victims and or witnesses who reported an offence or made a witness statement in fell sharply to compared to in and in . in the investigations completed in as in there was a relatively high proportion of victims from the bal kans. in addition many victims were recruited in western europe the netherlands in virtually all cases whereas the number of investigations whereby victims were recruited in eastern europe and the baltic states declined in relative terms. as in bulgaria was the most fre incidentally figures relating to show a sharp rise in the number of victims reported to the stv see appendix . summary quently occurring country of origin of victims in the investigations successfully completed in . however there was a sharp rise in the number of investigations concerning cases with victims from romania. the number of investigations into cases with nigerian victims was low in and compared to earlier years. underage victims in one third of investigations into thb also involved underage victims. over the years there have been significantly more investigations into domestic thb than into cross border thb in compared to . in real numbers in the investigations completed suc cessfully in there were underage victims of whom reported the offence. no infor mation is known about the victims gender in successfully completed investigations. means of coercion used the threat of violence plays an important role in bringing victims into prostitution and keep ing them there as does keeping them under surveillance and or locking them up and imposing debts on them. however the first means of coercion is used in both cross border and domestic thb whereas the last two are used particularly in cross border thb. the rise in the number of investigations in in which feigned love was used by loverboys to bring victims into prostitution did not continue in . in more than a quarter of cases this method was used compared to in . the method as also became clear earlier is not used exclusively in domestic thb of the cases in where there was feigned love concerned cross border and domestic thb. not all victims are forced to do sex work. sometimes the element of exploitation only in volves confiscating earnings. of the cases in whereby the trafficker confiscated money according to the victims themselves of them were allowed or able to keep some of the money for themselves. in the other cases however the victims had to hand over everything. victims put to work victims may be put to work in prostitution within and outside the netherlands. victims who are recruited abroad are more often brought into prostitution outside the netherlands and outside the country of origin than victims who are recruited in the netherlands. the former were put to work primarily in the neighbouring countries of germany and belgium whereas the second group also ended up in other countries including italy in particular. the downward trend in the number of investigations whereby victims were brought into prostitution outside the nether lands as well continued into from more than half at the start of the century to more than in to one third in . documents victims found in investigations into cross border thb increasingly possess a valid passport the percentage of investigations whereby victims had a fake passport therefore declined further . nevertheless in almost one third of cases in there were still one or more victims with a fake passport. in and this concerned in more than half of the cases fake passports of eu member states. no fake visas were found in any of the investigations in . trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur . suspects . . investigations and suspects number of suspects the police identified a total of suspects of thb arrested and referred to the pps in the investigations successfully completed in . the number of arrested and referred sus pects was therefore considerably lower than in the two previous years and comparable with the level in . the average number of arrested suspects in each investigation also fell further in . this fall was almost for investigations into cross border thb from . in to . in and one third for investigations into domestic thb from . in to . in . level of organisation of the suspects arrested in formed part of a network of an isolated group and were solo operators a division that can be seen in general terms in all the years since . of the solo operators in the majority were engaged in domestic thb and of the isolated groups this was . virtually all criminal networks were engaged in cross border thb. arrested recruiters with cross border thb not all the persons suspected of involvement in thb are tracked down and prosecuted. recruiters in particular often remain out of reach in such cases although this was less often the case in and than in previous years. the percentage of investiga tions into cross border thb whereby all recruiters were arrested was in fact much higher in just as in than in previous years or more. moreover in a further fifth of the investigations some of the recruiters were arrested. this does not alter the fact that in more than a quarter of cases no recruiters were arrested at all. with investigations into domestic thb on the other hand the recruiters are virtually always arrested. these are in fact often those who also bring the victims into prostitution and exploit them there. countries of origin the most common nationalities of suspects identified in investigations in are dutch ro manian and bulgarian. the proportion of the various nationalities has fluctuated considerably over the years. for example the number of suspects of romanian nationality in increased sharply to almost one fifth. the proportion of bulgarian suspects was slightly less. the number of arrested suspects of albanian nationality on the other hand after a peak in declined sharply . the number of nigerian suspects was low in as in compared to the pre vious years. the proportion of dutch suspects was consistently around . also when one considers the countries of birth of the suspects the netherlands romania and bulgaria formed the top three and the rise in the number of suspects from romania and fall in the number from albania is particularly striking. compared with the figures on nationality the number of sus pects with a turkish or surinamese background rose. if we look at the type of thb these per sons are suspected of it is noticeable that virtually all the suspects born in morocco and the dutch antilles and respectively were suspected of domestic thb. this applies to of suspects born in surinam. suspects from other foreign countries were exclusively bul garia romania the russian federation nigeria ghana and belgium or in most cases turkey albania former yugoslavia and ukraine suspected of cross border thb. of the suspects of non dutch nationality were residing legally in the netherlands at the time of their arrest . the number of foreign suspects who were residing illegally in the summary netherlands at the time of their arrest rose considerably in the period from to from in to in in and in . the share of foreign suspects re siding legally in the netherlands fell in inverse proportion. proprietors among the suspects arrested in were proprietors of sex establishments of which were licensed. in of these cases the suspicion was reported to the municipality which had issued the licence which led to administrative proceedings against proprietors. in the percep tion of the police there is a certain level of awareness of the exploitative situation among the proprietors of sex establishments that come to the fore in one way or another in an investiga tion. during the years and half of these proprietors were typified as aware of but not actively cooperating in the exploitation and worked actively as traffickers in human beings. the latter type rose dramatically in whereas the former in fact fell sharply. . . suspects prosecuted in of the cases registered with the pps in the age of the suspects was between and years. seven were minors. the proportion of minors among the suspects remained the same at compared to the previous years. the average age of the suspects in was years. once again the netherlands was the most common country of birth in . the proportion of suspects born in the netherlands increased proportionally compared to from one quarter to almost one third in absolute figures there was a slight fall in numbers. what is noticeable is the large proportion of suspects born in bulgaria romania and turkey each with at least but of these three countries only the romanian share rose in . in addition the proportion of suspects from the former soviet union and surinam rose in that year however the rise in and the substantial proportion of albanian suspects identified in did not continue into . most suspects are male in of the cases in . the proportion of female suspects has fluctuated since around one quarter. as far as the gender of the suspects are concerned there are clear differences between the countries of origin. looking at only the five most com mon countries of origin of suspects the netherlands romania bulgaria turkey and the former soviet union it is noticeable that there were hardly any women among the turkish suspects just one whereas of the romanian suspects were women. the remaining three countries of origin occupy an intermediate position in this respect. bibliography dijk e.m.h. van e.a. . mensenhandel in nederland . zoetermeer klpd nri . klerks p. e.a. . escort in amsterdam een onderzoek naar aard en omvang van escortservices in de gemeente amsterdam. amsterdam eysink smeets etman. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . mensenhandel eerste rapportage van de nationaal rappor teur. den haag bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . mensenhandel aanvullende kwantitatieve gegevens. twee de rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur. den haag bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . mensenhandel derde rapportage van de nationaal rappor teur. den haag bnrm. ppm dnp . prostitutie en mensenhandel. korpsmonitor . den haag ppm dnp. ppm dnp . prostitutie en mensenhandel. korpsmonitor . den haag ppm dnp. stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . jaarverslag . utrecht stv. stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . jaarverslag . utrecht stv. stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . jaarverslag . utrecht stv stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . jaarverslag . amersfoort stv. this bibliography contains an overview of the publications studied for writing the dutch version of this report. al though the english translation is a somewhat abridged version for the readers information the bibliography is in cluded in its entirety. appendix article a criminal code article a non official english translation of january . any person who a by force violence or other act by the threat of violence or other act by extortion fraud deception or the misuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs by the misuse of a vulnerable position or by giving or receiving remuneration or benefits in order to obtain the consent of a person who has control over this other person recruits transports moves accommodates or shelters another person with the inten tion of exploiting this other person or removing his or her organs b recruits transports moves accommodates or shelters a person with the intention of exploiting that other person or removing his or her organs when that person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years c recruits takes with him or abducts a person with the intention of inducing that person to make him self herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration in another coun try d forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to make himself herself available for performing work or services or making his her organs available or takes any action in the circum stances referred to under a which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know will result in that other person making himself herself available for performing labour or services or making his her organs available e induces another person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration or to make his her organs available for remuneration or takes any action towards another person which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that this will result in that other person making himself herself available for performing these acts or making his her organs available for remuneration when that other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years f wilfully profits from the exploitation of another person g wilfully profits from the removal of organs from another person while he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that the organs of that person have been removed under the circumstances referred to under a h wilfully profits from the sexual acts of another person with or for a third party for remuneration or the removal of that person s organs for remuneration when this other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years i forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to provide him with the proceeds of that person s sexual acts with or for a third party or of the removal of that person s organs shall be guilty of trafficking in human beings and as such liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties . exploitation comprises at least the exploitation of another person in prostitution other forms of sexual exploitation forced or compulsory labour or services slavery slavery like practices or servitude. . the following offences shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding eight years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties a offences as described in the first paragraph if they are committed by two or more persons acting in concert b offences as described in the first paragraph if such offences are committed in respect of a person who is under the age of sixteen. . the offences as described in the first paragraph committed by two or more persons acting in concert under the circumstance referred to in paragraph under b shall be punishable with a term of imprison ment not exceeding ten years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur . if one of the offences described in the first paragraph results in serious physical injury or threatens the life of another person it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. . if one of the offences referred to in the first paragraph results in death it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding fifteen years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. . article is applicable mutatis mutandis. a fifth category fine is a fine of maximum appendix supplementary tables in chapters and tables are included that contain only part of the available information in order to make them more readable. this appendix contains additional data. the table numbers in the appendix cor respond with the tables numbered in the same manner in the various chapters. for example table b . be longs to table . in chapter . table b . contains information on all the countries of origin of possi ble victims registered with the stv in the period from to whereas table . only contains in formation on the most common countries. supplementary tables to chapter victims table b . countries of origin of possible victims registered by the stv per annum country total n n n n n albania algeria angola armenia belarus belgium benin bosnia brazil bulgaria burundi cameroon china colombia congo croatia cuba czech republic dominican republic ecuador egypt eritrea estonia ethiopia france georgia germany ghana guinea guyana hungary indonesia iran iraq ireland trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur country total n n n n n italy ivory coast kazakhstan kyrgyzstan latvia liberia lithuania malawi moldova mongolia morocco namibia netherlands nigeria philippines poland romania russian fed. rwanda sierra leone slovakia somalia sudan suriname sweden taiwan tajikistan thailand togo turkey uganda ukraine uzbekistan vietnam former yugo slavia unknown total including kosovo. source stv registration . table b . countries of birth of possible victims in ikp s per annum country of birth total n n n albania algeria angola belarus benin brazil bulgaria appendix supplementary tables country of birth total n n n cameroon china colombia czech republic dominican republic ecuador estonia germany ghana hungary india indonesia iran iraq italy kenya latvia liberia lithuania moldova morocco mozambique netherlands nigeria palestine poland portugal romania russian federation sierra leone slovakia spain sri lanka sudan suriname thailand togo turkey uganda ukraine united kingdom vietnam western samoa unknown total trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur supplementary tables to chapter investigation table b . standard deviations with table . year cross border thb domestic thb total sd sd sd total table . nationalities of suspects of thb per annum nationality total n n n n n albanian azerbaijani belgian brazilian bulgarian cameroonian czech dutch estonian german ghanaian hungarian indonesian iraqi israeli italian liberian lithuanian moldavian moroccan nigerian polish romanian russian slovakian spanish stateless suriname syrian thai tunisian turkish ukrainian yugoslav unknown total appendix supplementary tables table b . countries of birth of suspects of thb per annum country of birth total n n n n n albania algeria azerbaijan belgium brazil bulgaria cameroon czech republic dutch antilles egypt estonia germany ghana hungary indonesia iraq israel italy lebanon liberia lithuania moldova morocco netherlands nigeria poland romania russian federation slovakia spain sudan suriname syria thailand tunisia turkey ukraine united kingdom former yugoslavia unknown total table b . countries of origin of victims per annum country of origin total n n n n n albania azerbaijan belarus belgium brazil trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur country of origin total n n n n n bulgaria cameroon czech republic estonia georgia germany ghana hungary indonesia italy latvia lithuania malawi moldova netherlands nigeria poland romania russian federation sierra leone slovakia thailand ukraine former yugoslavia supplementary tables to chapter the public prosecution service and prosecution table b . countries of birth of suspects per year of registration country of birth total n n n n n afghanistan albania angola belgium brazil bulgaria cameroon cape verde islands china colombia czech republic dutch antilles egypt estonia france germany ghana gold coast appendix supplementary tables country of birth total n n n n n greece guinea hungary indonesia dutch east indies international territory iran iraq ireland jordan latvia lebanon liberia lithuania malaysia morocco netherlands niger nigeria poland romania russian federation sierra leone somalia sudan suriname syria thailand tunisia turkey vietnam yugoslavia unknown total coastal region of present ghana. appendix explanation of the research methods used introduction bnrm collects information in a variety of ways. this appendix provides an explanation of the research methods used in the bnrm police study and the secondary analyses of the pps data. the bnrm police study introduction each year bnrm analyses all investigations into thb that have been completed by the police and re ferred to the pps. the results of this study can be found in chapter investigation . objectives and research questions the purpose of the study is to provide an insight into the way in which thb is committed in the nether lands by whom and with which type of victims. the research questions are as follows how many investigations into thb do the police complete in the netherlands in how can traffickers in human beings be typified to what extent do they form organised criminal collaborative groups how is the offence of thb carried out how can the victims of thb be typified to what extent and in what way is the prostitution sector involved in thb how much do traffickers earn from thb what offences apart from thb are committed by traffickers in what way is thb investigated what developments occur over time in relation to thb research method for this report all investigations into thb that were successfully completed in were collated and analysed. the results were then compared with the results from previous years. all police units that can carry out investigations into thb were approached. they were asked to report to the researchers all investigations into thb that were completed in after which the team leaders of these investigations were interviewed by telephone. these interviews were carried out using approxi mately the same list of questions that was used in earlier years. additional remarks the investigations analysed for this study concern in principle all investigations into thb that have been completed and referred to the pps and therefore provide a good picture of the situation. however more thb offences are committed than come to the attention of the police and not all investigations are brought to a positive conclusion and referred to the pps . the investigations analysed therefore only give a par tial picture of the real situation. how large or representative this part is is unknown. the pps data introduction at the request of bnrm each year analyses are carried out on a thb sub file from the national database known as om data which contains information from the district pps offices on the prosecution of suspects. the analyses give a picture of the course of proceedings in the first instance. om data contains information on cases and offences. unlike the situation in relation to police the analyses are carried out by siba of the wodc. trafficking in human beings fourth report of the national rapporteur investigation a criminal case within the context of prosecution is taken to mean the case against a single suspect. criminal cases against individual suspects may involve several criminal offences. the results of this study can be found in chapter the public prosecution service and prosecution . objective and research questions the purpose of the study is to provide an insight into the prosecution of suspects of thb in the nether lands. the research questions are as follows how many cases relating to thb were registered with the pps in how often are underage victims involved how can the suspects be typified as regards gender age and country of origin what offences other than thb are they suspected of how did the pps deal with cases in how did the courts settle cases in how often do the various parties lodge an appeal what developments are there over time with regard to thb research method from the total pps database a selection was made of cases in which the offence of thb was also registered. no cohort was followed in the analyses but each year the number of cases registered dealt with by the pps and settled by the court are examined. additional remarks only the principal charges are included in om data. in addition sometimes only the first offence in several principal charges is registered in om data. this means that not only does om data provide only a limited picture of the total number of thb offences that are committed namely that part that comes to the attention of the police and is referred to the pps but also that that part of the information that does indeed reach the pps and which may possibly play a role in the course of the prosecution cannot be found in om data. how much information is lost in this way is not known. this means that it does not necessarily refers to the same cases all the time. appendix notes on tables and statistics notes on the tables presented this report includes many tables. below are some comments that are important for the interpretation of these tables. due to rounding the tables do not always add up to exactly . for the sake of readability the tables do however always indicate . when numbers are set out in a column of a table in the heading of the relevant column the letter n is used an abbreviation for number . in the tables a dash shows that the number is zero and a dash also indicates that the corresponding percentage is . if the number is higher than zero but the percentage when rounded comes to is shown. notes on the statistics used standard deviation this report sometimes indicates what the average is for example the average number of suspects in inves tigations into thb. in addition the number n see above and the so called standard deviation sd are also always given. the standard deviation indicates the extent to which the numbers on which the average is calculated differ. the higher the standard deviation the more this is the case. index in some tables an index is given. the index shows how much the number of for example suspects has changed in a particular year compared with a base year. the year that is taken as a base year is set at . an index of higher than indicates a rise with respect to the base year and an index of lower than a fall. significance in this report results for different groups are sometimes compared with one another. if this is the case a check is usually made as to whether the difference found is significant or not. this is then indicated in the text with in a footnote the corresponding values chi df and p. this means that a check has been made as to how big the chance is that the difference found is based on coincidence. in this report it is assumed that the chance of coincidence may not be greater than a percentage often used among researchers. exactly how big this chance is can be seen from the p value indicated in the footnote. for example p . means that the chance of a coincidence is less than . the values chi and df this stands for the number of degrees of freedom are values that are necessary to determine whether differences are significant and are not discussed further here. appendix a few provisional figures for the year in the number of reports concerning victims to the stv rose enormously. the stv attributes the rise partly to growing attention being given to thb and to the fact that there has been intensive lobbying among cooperation partners as a result of which the police and a few reception facilities have reported more frequently. a total of possible victims were reported in almost half of the cases by the police. a total of re ports concerned underage persons. the most common countries of origin of the victims are the nether lands bulgaria romania and nigeria . in more than of the cases reported to the stv a report of the crime of thb was made to the police . source written information from the stv april . in more than police investigations into thb were completed successfully in the sense that sus pects were referred to the pps. source provisional count from bnrm survey of investigations into thb completed successfully in . suspects of thb were registered with the pps in men and women . the most common country of birth is the netherlands suspects followed by turkey romania and bulgaria . most suspects are aged between and years while four suspects were mi nors. in of the cases the suspicion concerned article a ter paragraph while in all other cases this was article a ter paragraph . in of the cases according to the charges an underage victim was involved. in of the cases thb is the only or most serious crime. in the other cases besides thb there was an even more serious crime involved usually sexual violence or other forms of violence . source provisional printout of pps data . a number of witness informants are included in the persons registered. the information on the criminal re ports shows that there are at least . incidentally it should not be ruled out that they are also victims of thb. the gender of three suspects is not known. colophon reference dutch national rapporteur on thb . trafficking in human beings supplementary figures. fourth report of the dutch national rapporteur the hague bureau nrm. october bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on thb p.o. box nl eh the hague tel. fax production and printing olf legal productions wlp nijmegen tilburg bureau nrm 