 c documents and settings willem jan bureaublad nrm werkbestand.wpd trafficking in human beings supplementary figures second report of the dutch national rapporteur a.g. korvinus dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings e.m.h. van dijk d.a.c. koster m. smit bureau nrm the hague table of contents list of abbreviations v introduction victim records kept by the dutch foundation against trafficking in women . introduction . countries regions of origin . age and sex . the reporters the b regulation . introduction . description of the b regulation . research method . applications for and grants of a b permit . background characteristics of people with an application for a b permit police investigation into trafficking in human beings . introduction . research method . police investigations into trafficking in human beings in . suspects of trafficking in human beings . modus operandi of traffickers in human beings . . recruitment and countries of origin . . travel route and travel and residence documents . . exploitation in prostitution . prostitution sectors involved . victims of trafficking in human beings . proceeds of trafficking in human beings . criminal activities other than trafficking in human beings iv trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur prosecution . introduction . research method . trafficking in human beings cases registered with the public prosecution service . the suspects . handling by the public prosecution service . judgement by the court . appeal other figures summary and conclusions . introduction . victims . perpetrators . modus operandi . police investigation . prosecution . after the lifting of the general ban on brothels bibliography annexes annex notes on tables statistics and terminology notes on the tables presented notes on the statistics used notes on terminology used annex supplementary tables supplementary table to chapter supplementary tables to chapter list of abbreviations bnrm bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings b permit temporary residence permit based on the b regulation cfi criminal financial investigation strafrechtelijk financieel onderzoek sfo cie criminele inlichtingen eenheid criminal intelligence unit compas communicatiesysteem openbaar ministerie parket administratiesysteem communication system public prosecution service public prosecution office administration system eu european union hks herkenningsdienstsysteem identification service system ind immigratie en naturalisatiedienst immigration and naturalisation service indiac informatie en analysecentrum van de immigratie en naturalisatiedienst information and analysis centre of the immigration and naturalisation service klpd korps landelijke politiediensten national police services agency kmar koninklijke marechaussee dutch military police n number n a not applicable nl nederland the netherlands nri nationale recherche informatie national criminal intelligence service nrm nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel dutch national rapporteur on thb osce organization for security and co operation in europe ppm dnp project prostitutie en mensenhandel de nederlandse politie prostitution and thb project the dutch police pps public prosecution service sd standard deviation sfo strafrechtelijk financieel onderzoek criminal financial investigation cfi shop stichting hulpverlening en opvang prostituees foundation for support and reception of prostitutes siba statistische informatievoorziening en beleidsanalyse statistical information supply and policy analysis stv stichting tegen vrouwenhandel dutch foundation against trafficking in women thb trafficking in human beings vi trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur vas vreemdelingen administratie systeem aliens administration system vc vreemdelingencirculaire immigration law circular wodc wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documentatiecentrum this in accordance with the un protocol on thb signed by the netherlands in order to criminalise forms of exploitation other than just in the sex industry as thb. the b regulation offers aliens who are possibly victims of thb and aliens who are witnesses of thb the opportunity to temporarily stay legally in the netherlands. introduction this is the english translation of a somewhat shortened and revised version of the second report of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm . this second report contains supplementary numerical information. it must be seen and read in conjunction with the first report that contains all sorts of background information and is of a more reflective nature. this report presents updated figures together with already published numerical data in order to show possible trends. the report includes a lot of tables and makes use of statistics. for notes on the tables and statistics as well as notes on the terminology used please refer to annex . in the area of thb there are many developments that are all worth mentioning such as the change in the law which is being worked on at the moment in the netherlands in connection with the broadening of the definition of trafficking in human beings thb the dutch chairmanship of the organization for security and co operation in europe osce and the plan to then put thb prominently on the international agenda as well as the consequences of the upcoming enlargement of the european union eu . these developments will be discussed in the third report of the nrm which is planned for the end of . for this report many people and bodies have made information available. the bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on thb bnrm is very grateful to them for this. a separate word of thanks goes out in the order of the chapter layout to the information and analysis centre of the ind indiac for making relevant databases available to mrs. m. verhoeven for her contribution to the police investigation and to mr. p.p.j. groen of the statistical information supply and policy analysis siba department of the scientific research and documentation centre wodc who carried out the analyses of the public prosecution service pps database for this report. chapter presents data on victims of thb reported to the dutch foundation against trafficking in women stv in . chapter contains information on b applications and the decision taken on these. chapter focuses on investigation by the dutch police in the field of thb. chapter contains data on thb cases registered with the pps their handling by the pps and judgement by the court. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur chapter contains a brief review of the figures regarding prostitution and thb originating from research carried out by bnrm and elsewhere. the final chapter gives a summary of the data presented in the preceding chapters looked at in relationship to one another and with a commentary. no far reaching conclusions and recommendations are however given the conclusions and recommendations formulated in the first report still apply in full the cabinet viewpoint on these has only recently been published and at the time this second report was written still has to be discussed in the lower house. the next third report will however again contain extensive conclusions and recommendations. finally it is also important to mention that this third report will include figures regarding that are comparable with those in the present report. it will then be clearer whether changes are taking place since the lifting of the general ban on brothels and if so what these are. because of its history the stv focuses in particular on female victims of thb the expertise embodied within the stv also lies mainly in this area and in its publications the foundation talks almost exclusively about women and uses the term trafficking in women and not trafficking in human beings . if however male victims are reported to it they are also recorded verbal information from stv . work is at present being carried out on computerising the record system for which the stv received a subsidy in the autumn of . victim records kept by the dutch foundation against trafficking in women . introduction the stv records reports on possible victims of thb. reports come for example from the police reception facilities individuals the dutch refugee council vluchtelingenwerk nederland and asylum seeker centres as well as from youth victim support organisations. there are also anonymous reports stv . for a number of reasons the records do not give a realistic picture of the character and scale of thb in the netherlands. the stv is dependent on third parties for reports stv . not all the victims however come to the knowledge of these third parties. in addition it appears that not all the victims for whom that does apply are reported to the stv. furthermore the fact is that in the stv was less accessible because of a lack of resources and due to undermanning which led to a reduction in the number of cases reported. a further complication is that to date the stv has been working with a non computerised record system which does not distinguish between requests for advice and consultation on the one hand and actual direct involvement with victims on the other. although on the basis of identity and other indicators double counting is as far as possible avoided this cannot entirely be excluded. this means that the victims recorded by the stv not only represent an unknown selection as regards character and scale of the total number of victims of thb in the netherlands but also of the number of victims that come into contact with the police and victim support organisations. the stv for that matter comments on this itself that the victims that are reported to it usually do know one or more women who are also possible victims of thb but who have not been reported to the stv stv and that the number of victims reported must at least be doubled to get a realistic picture. . countries regions of origin the possible victims of thb recorded by the stv that are or were working in prostitution in the netherlands come from all over the world. the stv records make trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur over the years to a total of possible victims of thb were notified to the stv. their number rose from in to in . data on the countries of origin of the victims notified to the stv over this period are not included in the present report but can be found in the first report nrm and of course in the original source stv . adjusted for the limited contactability the number of reports in would according to the stv be comparable with the number of reports in . the provisional figures for indicate a growth written information from the stv . the stv states that both individuals and victims themselves but also professional groups in some cases report thb without giving personal details. this does not however explain why the number of reports of this type increased in . a distinction by country of origin. grouping by region in a single case by country gives the summary shown in table . . table . origin of possible victims of thb reported to stv to inclusive region country total n n n n n n n n central and eastern europe africa asia latin america caribbean netherlands nl middle east western europe excl. nl unknown total source stv the reduced contactability of the stv in can be seen in the low number of victims reported to the stv in that year. for the first time in years there has in fact been a fall while other information sources and indicators show no signs of a reduction in the number of victims of thb in the netherlands. in that year the large number of reports where the victim s country of origin is not known is also striking. there are of them or a quarter of the total. the comments on the stv records victim records kept by the dutch foundation against trafficking in women because differs in various respects and the question is very much whether these differences reflect the actual developments that year is largely discussed separately in this paragraph. mentioned in the introduction that relate to their reliability and representativeness thus apply to an even greater extent for the records for . the table shows that the number of victims reported differs by region or country of origin. over the whole period central and eastern europe is the region from where most victims come. the main countries of origin in this region are bulgaria the czech republic poland the russian federation ukraine lithuania and romania. over the years however the pattern has changed. a fall has been observed in the percentage of central and eastern european victims since up to . the absolute number of reports concerning victims from this region however did not change appreciably over the same period. the percentage fall is largely explained by the increase in total number of reports of victims partly due to the rise in the number of reports concerning african mainly nigerian victims. this number rose up to particularly after both in absolute numbers and percentage terms. over the same period to the number of reports concerning dutch victims and victims from asia also increased the latter mainly due to an increase in reports concerning victims from china but their percentage share remained around the same. the number of reports relating to victims of thb from latin america including the caribbean increased steadily over the period from to inclusive with the exception of and to a more limited extent . very small numbers of reports concern victims from the middle east and western europe. perhaps partly due to the large number of unknown countries of origin differs in many respects from the above mentioned trends. both the number and also the percentage of reports relating to victims from central and eastern europe increased in that year while the number of reports relating to african victims fell by more than half in compared with the year before. their proportion also fell in percentage terms even though the percentage is calculated with respect to just the reports for which the victims countries of origin were known. the number of reports relating to dutch victims and victims from asia also fell in . whether as regards victims countries of origin the year heralded all sorts of trend breaks or has given a distorted picture due to the comparatively small number of reports is expected to become clear in the following annual reviews of the stv. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur . age and sex no annual reviews have been published of the age distribution of victims reported to the stv. table . therefore only shows the age distribution of the victims reported in . table . age distribution of victims reported to the stv in age category n of total n of reports with known age to years to years to years to years to years years and over unknown n a total source stv the large number of unknown ages in this table is striking for of the reports the age of the possible victim is not known. the victims whose age is known are in cases minors that is of the reports where the age is known . the great majority of the victims fall in the age category from to years of the . the stv does not report on the sex of the victims notified but only a single case a year concerns men or boys verbal and written information from the stv . . the reporters table . gives the list of numbers of reports by different categories of reporters in . victim records kept by the dutch foundation against trafficking in women it is rather confusing in this respect that the stv has classed organisations for youth care and guardianship under reception facilities. these are organisations that provide prostitutes with medical care and information at the workplace or during special surgeries. table . reporters of victims of thb in reporter n police anonymous reception facility individuals dutch refugee council asylum centres youth victim support legal assistance victim support organisation victim him herself health care field work other total source stv the police are responsible for almost half of the total number of reports. also quite a few reports are made anonymously in the sense that the reporter does not want to give either his her name or his her professional background. these reporters like the victims themselves are often reluctant to call in the authorities out of fear of deportation or imprisonment stv . reports are also frequently received from reception facilities. other reporters are by decreasing frequency individuals prostitutes brothel keepers clients friends and partners dutch refugee council asylum centres staff of reporting centres reception centres and asylum seeker centres organisations providing youth victim support and legal assistance. the other categories of reporters included in the list such as victim support organisations victims themselves health care institutions and field work occasionally report victims to the stv. vc april supplement sdu publishers. the b regulation . introduction thb is not an offence that can only be prosecuted on the basis of a complaint. reporting the offence is therefore not an absolute condition for proceeding with prosecution. nevertheless it is in practice very important for the investigation and prosecution of thb that both victims and witnesses report thb and that those reporting an offence remain available to the police and the pps during investigation and prosecution. furthermore it is important that victims and witnesses of thb are offered reception and support. the so called b regulation section b of the immigration law circular is designed to open the way for this. paragraph . briefly discusses the main lines of this regulation. the bnrm investigated how many possible victims and witnesses of thb over the period from to june inclusive made an appeal for the b regulation according to the records of the immigration and naturalisation service ind and were granted a temporary residence permit on these grounds. the results of this investigation are described in the present chapter. . description of the b regulation the b regulation offers aliens who are possibly victims of thb and aliens who are witnesses of thb the option to temporarily stay legally in the netherlands. in order to give the victim the time to decide whether she wants to report an offence the victim is granted a reflection period of a maximum of three months. during these three months the deportation of the victim from the netherlands is temporarily suspended. this reflection period does not apply for witness informants. if the alien decides not to report an offence she must leave the netherlands immediately. if the victim or the witness decides to report the offence this report is regarded as an application to grant a residence permit. the residence permit is issued for the duration of the investigation and criminal proceedings and expires when the investigation or the prosecution is completed or stopped. the b regulation also provides certain facilities for victims and witnesses of thb also for victims who are still in the reflection period phase reception and shelter medical assistance legal assistance and special provisions for maintenance. in principle when their temporary residence permit under the b regulation further referred to for convenience as the b permit expires victims of thb can attempt to have this converted into a permanent residence permit. as grounds for this they may trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur a person may after all be involved in several procedures and for each procedure have several contacts with the ind. this is the case for people of the people for whom a b permit was applied for . this is the case for people of the people to whom a b permit was granted . give humanitarian reasons. bnrm has tried to investigate how many victims of thb follow this course however it was not possible to discern this from the present records of the ind and the stv. according to reports this would only involve occasional cases. . research method the ind being the authority to which applications for residence permits under the b regulation are submitted has on the request of bnrm supplied files containing all the contacts of people with the ind over the period from to june involving the b regulation. the files therefore contain both all the applications for residence permits and all permits granted under the b regulation. bnrm has aggregated and combined all the files on a person level . the result forms the basis for the analyses in the following paragraphs. a few comments on these files are called for. firstly the ind does not record consistently and or clearly whether applications for and grants of temporary residence permits are linked with the b regulation. as a result the files may show that a person who applies for a b permit is granted a temporary residence permit on completely different grounds for example living with partner or working in eu . the reverse also happens people who do not apply for a b permit may be granted one. in the analyses it has been assumed that people who are marked either in the application or in the grant as b had made an appeal for the b regulation. they are then counted in both categories applications and grants . because an appeal for the b regulation is not recorded by the ind as standard and compulsorily it is possible that not all victims that made an appeal for the b regulation have been traced. secondly thb by the definition of the offence does not necessarily relate to aliens. dutch people or foreigners residing legally in the netherlands may also become victims of thb. the ind data presented in this paragraph only relate to victims and witnesses of thb residing illegally in the netherlands because only then legalisation of residence in the netherlands is necessary for investigation and prosecution. thirdly the ind does not record whether a person is granted a b permit as a victim or as a witness. furthermore a witness may also be a victim. different sources e.g. van dijk show that victims of thb find it easier to report an offence as a witness than as a victim. finally it should again be noted that the ind files analysed only contain data on people eligible for a temporary residence permit because they have reported thb. victims who are still in the reflection period are not recorded by the ind. the b regulation see annex for further explanation. it is assumed that the numbers recorded in the first half of can be approximately doubled for the whole year. . applications for and grants of a b permit table . shows how many people submitted an application for a b permit to the ind over the period from to june inclusive and how often this was granted. this relates only to first applications and grants so not to applications for and grants of prolongation of the b permit. table . also indicates how big the fall rise is compared with the base year with indices . table . applications for and grants of b permit broken down by year year applications for b temporary residence permit grants of b temporary residence permit granted n index n index to june inclusive total n a n a the number of applications for and grants of b permits fluctuates each year but has increased considerably in the last two years. in total over the period from to june inclusive applications for a b permit were submitted and b permits were granted. this means that in the investigation period for applications no permit was granted. there are a number of reasons for this. for example applications were withdrawn or expire. this happens for example if the investigation or the prosecution is not started or is stopped. it also happens that victims witnesses who report an offence or make a statement and appeal for the b regulation afterwards disappear again. where they go is usually not known. possibly victims return to their country of origin or go back to work in prostitution self employed or employed by traffickers in human beings. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur this was on the request of bnrm checked at random by the ind. for of the people this characteristic was known. n and n respectively. for of the people this characteristic was known. n and n respectively. this difference is significant chi . df p . . for people who made a first application for a b permit it was not always the first time that they came into contact with the ind. people had already had previous contact with the ind for example in connection with an asylum application or an arrest possibly as an illegal alien for example in case of a control in the prostitution circuit . anyway the number of b applications is only a fraction of the total number of applications for temporary residence permits that the ind receives and grants each year. in the total number of applications for temporary residence permits was and in . the proportion of applications for b permits out of these is per mille for both years. the number of temporary residence permits granted in was and in . the proportion of b permits granted out of these is respectively and per mille. . background characteristics of people with an application for a b permit sex of the victims witnesses of thb for whom over the period from to june inclusive a b permit was applied for and whose sex is known were women and men. not all these people were granted a b permit. among those to whom a b permit was granted and whose sex is known are women and men. that means comparatively fewer b permits were granted to men than to women. age in table . the age of the victims witnesses with an application for a b permit is presented. the b regulation this difference is significant chi . df p . . table . age of people with application for a b permit up to and including june age applications for b temporary residence permit grants of b temporary residence permit granted n n to to to to to and over total two thirds of all victims witnesses of thb who applied for a b permit or to whom one was granted fall in the age category from to years. over are minors. among the minors who received a b permit there are also very young children namely five aged from to years. further investigation shows that this age category very probably includes children of victims or witnesses of thb. particularly in the lowest and highest age categories to years and and over b permits are granted comparatively less often than in the middle age categories respectively and awards versus to in the age categories between and years . table . breaks down the age of the victims witnesses to whom a b permit was granted by sex where this is known. table . age of people with b permit broken down by sex to june inclusive age women men n n to to to to to and over total trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur chi . df p . . children people of years or younger are kept outside the analysis. chi . df p . . the age for the men varies significantly more than for women. men are comparatively more strongly represented in the lowest and highest age categories and significantly less strongly in the age category from years. this is partly explained by the fact that there are comparatively more children of victims among the men. when this is corrected the difference does however remain significant. a plausible explanation for this is also that among the men there are comparatively more actual witnesses of thb. in various surveys the number of adult male victims of thb is in fact estimated to be low van gelder see also nrm . nationality table . presents the nationality of victims and witnesses of thb. this table only includes the commonest nationalities. a table showing all the nationalities is included in annex table . table . nationality of people with application for b permit to june inclusive nationality applications for b permit grants of b permit granted n n bulgarian ukrainian nigerian russian romanian czech polish lithuanian moldavian slovakian other unknown total the b regulation chi . df p . . for the other countries this percentage is between and . and people respectively. because the sex of people is unknown the total column does not add up to the total of the women and men columns. one sixth of the victims witnesses of thb for whom a b permit has been applied for are of bulgarian nationality. furthermore a comparatively large number of victims witnesses are of a nationality of other countries from central and eastern europe or of nigerian nationality. although the top of the commonest nationalities for both people to whom a b permit was granted and to whom a b permit was not granted is the same there are however significant differences between the victims witnesses of different nationalities where this relates to the percentage of applications that results in a permit being granted. of the nationalities mentioned in table . the percentage of people whose applications are honoured is the highest for bulgaria moldavia and slovakia and the lowest for lithuanians . table . breaks down the nationalities of the victims witnesses with a b permit application by region of origin. central and eastern europe is broken down here into central europe poland the czech republic slovakia hungary eastern europe the former soviet union the baltic states estonia latvia lithuania and the balkans countries from the former yugoslavia romania bulgaria albania moldavia . the netherlands has special relations on the one hand with surinam indonesia and the dutch antilles because they are former colonies and on the other hand with turkey and morocco because these are the countries where in the past many guest workers were recruited. only a few victims witnesses with b permits originate from these five countries. table . therefore classifies victims witnesses of surinam or antillian nationality in the category latin america and caribbean victims witnesses of turkish nationality in the category eastern europe victims witnesses of moroccan nationality in the category africa and victims witnesses of indonesian nationality in the category asia . table . region of origin of people with application for b permit to june inclusive region of origin applications for b permit grants of b permit n n western europe central europe eastern europe baltic states trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur region of origin applications for b permit grants of b permit chi . df p . . for the other regions these percentages lie between and . central europe eastern europe the baltic states and the balkans are combined here into central and eastern europe because the stv makes no distinction between these areas in its publications. balkans africa latin america and caribbean asia unknown total victims witnesses who make use of the b regulation come comparatively frequently from the balkans. eastern and central europe and africa also score high. the percentage of applications honoured differs significantly by region. a b permit is granted comparatively most often to people from the balkans and comparatively least often to people from asia and western europe and respectively . as previously stated these data include a selection namely of victims and witnesses who report an offence or make a statement. the origin of this group therefore does not have to reflect the origin of all victims of thb. to gain more understanding of the similarities and differences a check was made as to what extent the areas of origin as presented in table . correspond with the areas of origin of victims that are recorded by the stv. the result is shown in table . . this table compares the areas of origin for the year being the most recent full record year. the netherlands is not taken into account as a country of origin because dutch victims of thb may be reported to the stv but do not need a residence permit and do not therefore come into contact with the ind. the analyses only include the victims witnesses whose country of origin is known. as a result of the stv figures people are left out of account and of the ind figures. the b regulation including reports where the country of origin is the netherlands or unknown this column totals . the differences in table . are therefore not significant. table . origin of people with application for b permit and recorded with stv in origin applications for b permit recorded with stv n n central and eastern europe africa asia western europe latin america total the distribution of victims of thb by area of origin is more or less the same for for the ind and stv records. the most important area of origin in both sets of records is central and eastern europe. within this area both in the stv and the ind figures bulgaria the russian federation and ukraine are the three commonest countries of origin. in second place is africa with nigeria as the most common country of origin in both sets of records. table . breaks down the areas of origin of the victims witnesses to whom a b permit is granted by the year the permit was granted. table . region of origin of people with b permit broken down by year region of origin up to june inclusive total n n n n n n n n western europe central europe eastern europe baltic states balkans africa latin america and caribbean trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur region of origin up to june inclusive total chi . df p . . asia unknown total per year the number of b permits granted per region of origin fluctuates considerably and significantly. striking in particular is the increase in victims witnesses from the balkans in the last two years. furthermore the reduction in victims witnesses from central and eastern europe in the last year of the investigation is striking even if these annual figures are doubled the data for do in fact relate to the period from january to june inclusive . in table . the region of origin of the victims witnesses with a b permit is broken down by sex where this characteristic is known. table . region of origin of people with a b permit broken down by sex to june inclusive region of origin women men n n western europe central europe eastern europe baltic states balkans africa latin america and caribbean asia total the b regulation chi . df p . . chi . df p . . men with a b permit significantly more often have the nationality of a country from western europe than women even if children are left out of account. in fact cases against one suspect are sent in to the pps. for the sake of readability however we also talk of suspects sent in . a question was added on the border crossing into the netherlands for victims recruited abroad. in addition a check was made for suspects not arrested and or not sent in as to verify the reason for not arresting them and or not sending them in. police investigation into trafficking in human beings . introduction for an adequate approach to thb knowledge regarding perpetrators victims and modus operandi the method of operation of the perpetrators is vital. for this reason the national criminal intelligence service nri of the national police services agency klpd on behalf of the board of police commissioners has carried out a research into thb in the netherlands. the results are published in the report mensenhandel in nederland thb in the netherlands van dijk . the nrm collected police data regarding thb for the year . the results of this follow up research are presented in this chapter. the results from the nri research are also included in this. firstly because the numerical data from the nri research have been analysed again together with the data for so that any developments and trends over time can be identified. secondly by repeating relevant information and conclusions regarding thb from that report in this chapter. . research method the research method used for the reference year is a virtually exact copy of the research method as used in the nri investigation for the reference year . research design in june all the police authorities who can carry out investigations into thb were approached. they were asked to report to the researchers all the investigations into thb completed in and sent in to the pps that is one or more suspects were sent in to the pps . from the completed investigations thus collected a few essential key data regarding the thb on which the investigation focussed were then collected by means of telephone interviews with the team leaders of these investigations. this method was chosen in order to collect information quickly and efficiently. in the interviews the same questionnaire was used as the nri used for the reference year supplemented with a few questions prompted by developments and relevance. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur there are no cases where no offence is reported for the investigation period . practice does however show that cases where no offence is reported are rarely completed and sent in van dijk . the adjustment of the criterion had no noticeable consequences on the combination of the results for with the nri results of van dijk . for the nri research both completed and discontinued investigations into thb over the period and those still underway were surveyed. for it was decided only to survey and analyse investigations that had been completed and sent in to the pps. this means that investigations into thb for which the victims have not reported the offence can be included in the analyses. this approach was also prompted by the intention of the nrm to also collect these police data for following years. by using the submission date as the end date of the investigation it is clear which investigation must be reported to the researchers in which year. the choice does mean that when interpreting the results one must keep in mind that the start year of the investigations may differ. generalisability of the information the investigations analysed do concern all the investigations into thb completed and sent in but must be regarded as an unknown random sample of the total number of thb offences in the netherlands. after all more offences are committed than come to the knowledge of the police and not all investigations are brought to a positive end or sent in to the pps . in other words the investigations only represent part of the reality. it is not known how great or representative this part is. . police investigations into trafficking in human beings in number and type of completed investigations table . gives a summary of the investigations completed by the police in the period and sent in to the pps broken down by the year in which the investigation was completed. an indication is always given of how big the fall rise is with respect to the base year with indices . this table also breaks down the results by the type of thb cross border or within the netherlands. in the case of cross border thb victims are recruited abroad. in the case of thb within the netherlands victims are recruited in the netherlands. one of the cases investigated involved a combination of both. this involved an investigation by a police region bordering belgium where recruitment was carried out mainly in the netherlands but occasionally also in belgium. this investigation was classified as thb within the netherlands. police investigation into trafficking in human beings the percentage of investigations into thb within the netherlands with respect to all investigations per year is respectively and . for these data were not collected. the question was added back into the questionnaire for after its relevance was ascertained. table . completed investigations into thb broken down by year and type of thb year cross border thb thb within the netherlands total n index n index n index total n a n a n a the number of investigations into thb completed by the police increased considerably particularly in . in that year investigations were completed and sent in to the pps. this increase had already started in when the number of investigations completed was already higher than in previous years. of the completed investigations in related to thb within the netherlands and to cross border thb. these percentages differ from year to year. in the proportion of investigations into thb within the netherlands was the lowest and in the highest . immediate cause for the investigation for the period and the immediate cause for the investigations into thb was studied. the result also per year is shown in table . . the initial cause for the investigation was looked for. for example in virtually all the investigations completed victim s reported an offence at a given time. in the table below however reporting an offence is only given as a cause if the victims themselves possibly with the help of third parties went to the police to report an offence. if on the other hand regular controls by the police in the prostitution sector lead to the discovery of possible victims of thb who later report an offence the cause given is a prostitution control. furthermore investigations are started on the basis of information from the national criminal intelligence service cie tips and residual information from other investigations. the latter is for example the case if an investigation already started is taken over by another police region or if in an investigation other suspects emerge who justify an independent investigation. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur totals per column n and total . table . immediate cause for the investigation broken down by year immediate cause total n n n n n reporting an offence prostitution control other investigation cie tips other total these data were not collected for a spontaneous report was the cause for the investigation in almost half of the cases. furthermore controls in the prostitution sector lead to investigations comparatively often. the other category often relates to incidents in a prostitution environment that necessitates police intervention for example fights or assault . duration of police investigation the number of months that the investigations into thb analysed took was checked. the result is shown in table . broken down by the year in which the investigation ended. table . duration of investigation in months broken down by year duration of investigation total n or more total a third of the investigations are completed within months. this percentage rises after months to . the longest investigation took months. on average an police investigation into trafficking in human beings standard deviation . n . average period per year in months . . . . . total . . of the total number of suspects were distinguished as the main suspect and as accomplice suspect. investigation into thb takes months. the average duration of the investigation did not change significantly over time. the time that a police investigation into thb takes depends on a number of factors. for example in the investigation by van dijk a strong relationship was found with the number of suspects on which the investigation focuses the more suspects the longer the investigation takes. on the other hand investigations into cross border thb did not take significantly longer than investigations into thb within the netherlands. this is because the foreign part of the criminal group is rarely investigated and traced. . suspects of trafficking in human beings table . presents the number of suspects of thb distinguished and arrested as well as the number of suspects that were sent in to the pps broken down by the year in which the investigation was completed. for the suspects distinguished an indication is also given of how big the fall increase has been over the years with indices . an indication is also given of what percentage of the suspects distinguished were arrested and sent in in the relevant year. table . suspects of thb per year year suspects distinguished suspects arrested suspects sent in n index n n total n a percentage of the number of suspects distinguished in the relevant year over the period to inclusive the police distinguished a total of suspects of thb. of these were arrested and sent in to the pps. for the reason why suspects distinguished were not arrested and or sent in to the pps trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur for example an investigation in another region or a police investigation started separately focused on thb or another offence . n for the other suspects in it was not possible to find out why they were not arrested sent in . was investigated. this shows that of these suspects could not be found and had probably gone abroad. for some of these suspects an international tracing warrant had been issued. for of the lost suspects police charges were dropped because of the marginal role that the suspect played or because of lack of evidence. almost half of these suspects themselves worked as prostitutes. also a number of these suspects were residing illegally in the netherlands. they were deported. of the lost suspects were transferred to another police investigation or would possibly be arrested and or sent in at a later date. the number of suspects increased considerably particularly in the last two years investigated. table . presents the average number of suspects per investigation for the years investigated. a corresponding table with standard deviations is included in annex table . table . average number of suspects per investigation per year year suspects distinguished suspects arrested suspects sent in n on average n on average n on average . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . total . . the average number of suspects distinguished arrested and sent in per investigation fell in the last year. the comparatively low average number of suspects per investigation while as discussed later in this paragraph thb is often carried out by perpetrators who belong to extensive criminal networks is partly explained by the fact that the number of suspects distinguished in an investigation partly depends on the extent to which the police take the trouble to trace the whole criminal suspects group. in most investigations however priority is given to tracing and prosecuting suspects residing and or operating in the netherlands van dijk . suspects who are not or rarely in the netherlands usually recruiters and intermediaries are as a result left out of account in many investigations. this paragraph reports further on suspects arrested. police investigation into trafficking in human beings n for suspects the sex could not be found . the percentage of women among the suspects from is respectively and . sex a quarter of the suspects arrested are female. the number of women among the suspects has increased comparatively in the last two years. of the female suspects some were themselves victims of thb van dijk . origin table . shows the countries of origin of the suspects arrested. this table only includes the commonest countries of origin. a table giving all the countries of origin of the suspects is included in annex table . in addition to the nationality and the country of birth table . also shows the origin of the suspects. for this last characteristic the background characteristics nationality and country of birth are combined as follows if the nationality is non dutch or the country of birth is not the netherlands the suspect is classified as non netherlands country of origin. for that matter the origin of the suspects thus obtained virtually corresponds to the countries of birth table. table . countries of origin of suspects of thb to inclusive country nationality country of birth origin n n n netherlands former yugoslavia nigeria albania bulgaria turkey germany morocco czech republic romania ukraine ghana dutch antilles other unknown total trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur looking at the origin of the suspects. almost half of the suspects are of dutch nationality. some of them were however born outside the netherlands. furthermore a comparatively large number of suspects come from former yugoslavia and to a lesser extent nigeria turkey albania and bulgaria. further analyses show that suspects of cross border thb come comparatively just as often from the netherlands as suspects of thb within the netherlands. suspects with a foreign background from the last group do however come more frequently from morocco while suspects from the first group come more often from former yugoslavia nigeria and a variety of other countries. table . breaks down the nationality of the suspects by the year in which the investigation was completed. table . nationality of suspects of thb per year nationality total n n n n n n netherlands former yugoslavia nigeria albania bulgaria turkey germany morocco czech republic romania ukraine other unknown total in the last year studied the number of suspects of dutch nationality increased also comparatively. furthermore the nationality of the suspects varies from year to year whereby there seems to be no question of a clear trend. residence status for suspects of non dutch nationality for the years and their residence status was checked. this shows that of the suspects reside legally in the netherlands on the basis of a residence permit usually based on living with a partner police investigation into trafficking in human beings of these suspects are asylum seekers. have a residence permit on other grounds for which a precise further breakdown based on the data collected is not possible. it is however clear that in virtually all further cases this involves a residence permit based on living with a partner. the latter group then comes from countries with no visa obligation for example the european union or a few applicant member states of the european union . they can stay in the netherlands for to months depending on the country of origin without a visa. nevertheless the free period expires on committing a criminal act. the perpetrator is then residing in the netherlands illegally. n this could not be determined for all suspects of non dutch nationality . sometimes based on an asylum application and reside legally in the netherlands on the basis of a visa or because they are travelling in the so called free period . of the suspects of non dutch nationality reside illegally in the netherlands. among these illegals there are also suspects from countries with no visa obligation. their residence has however become illegal because they have exceeded the free period . in the number of suspects with a residence permit fell from to and the number of suspects residing illegally in the netherlands rose from to . visa obligation a check was made as to what extent suspects of non dutch nationality come from countries for which there is no longer a visa obligation for example member states and some of the applicant states of the eu. for this a check was made for each investigation as to how many suspects on the start date of the investigation were of a nationality of a country with or without a visa obligation. the link to the start date of the investigation is particularly important for countries for which the visa obligation was lifted during the investigation period namely estonia latvia and lithuania bulgaria and romania . the result of this exercise is shown in table . . table . suspects of thb broken down by visa obligation and year visa obligation total n n n n n n country without visa obligation country with visa obligation total trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur this is the total of suspects from central and eastern europe with no visa obligation and suspects from other countries with no visa obligation . after all it is not known whether they obtained the residence permit before or after an il legal residence in the netherlands. the survey group is suspects of thb in and with a foreign nationality not having a residence permit. this group consists of persons. the percentage of operators among the suspects is and respectively. when one partner is a helper with a marginal role the partnership is categorised as a soloist . the percentage of suspects arrested that based on their nationality had no visa obligation at the time that the investigation started is . this percentage varies from year to year but seems to have increased slightly in the last investigation year. further analyses show this can be attributed to a comparatively greater influx of suspects from countries in central and eastern europe with no visa obligation in that year. the percentage of suspects from these countries was in the years to inclusive in fact to and in . these results may also be affected by factors other than whether or not there is a visa obligation. in addition no account is taken of the fact that a number of suspects hold a residence permit. if this last group is left out of account this may only be done for the years and because these data are missing for previous years then it appears that suspects upon their arrest came from a country with no visa obligation and suspects from a country with a visa obligation. from the results taken together it is not then possible to directly deduce a disproportionate absence or considerable increase in the number of suspects from countries with no visa obligation. operators of sex establishments of the suspects arrested are operators of mainly clubs and brothels. this number did in fact increase per investigation year from five operators in to operators in but the percentage of operators out of the total number of suspects in the relevant years fluctuates somewhat. many of the operators arrested were sent in to the pps. type of partnership with regard to thb three forms of criminal organisation can be distinguished van dijk . firstly the soloist one person has one or more girls working for him or her. this is for example often the case for loverboy businesses and other forms of thb within the netherlands even where victims are also brought in from abroad. although many pimps do know each other and also consult one another these are one man businesses . the pimp is sometimes assisted by a helper who has a very marginal role for example keeping an eye on the victim when the pimp is not present. secondly the isolated criminal group. this is a group of at least two members each having a serious part in the thb and maximum members responsible for the whole thb process from recruitment to putting victims into prostitution and has police investigation into trafficking in human beings and respectively. no demonstrable contact with other groups or persons who are involved in thb. in the case of cross border thb the members of the group fetch the victims from abroad themselves for example via a family member of the chief suspect or their partner who lives abroad. the main suspects often run a brothel themselves. thirdly the criminal networks. at least six but usually many more persons are involved. these groups often meet the description of criminal macro networks as set out in the investigation of klerks p. in this undifferentiated criminal infrastructure in principle everyone is associated with everyone else via one or more intermediaries. there are also clear clusters based on geographic closeness family links friendships commercial chains and interrelated activities . in the case of thb clusters arise around the recruitment in specific countries the transport to the netherlands and the prostitution of victims in one of more countries towns. victims are bought and sold on and often recruited and or employed in several countries. over the period soloists were traced isolated groups and virtually always branches of criminal networks . table . shows per year the forms of organisation traced. table . criminal organisations of thb broken down by year organisation form total n n n n n n soloist isolated group network total three fifths of the investigations focused on branches of criminal networks one fifth on isolated groups and a further one fifth on soloists. the type of partnership on which the investigations focused did change somewhat comparatively over the years but in virtually every year the majority of the investigations focused on criminal networks. further analyses show that in the total investigation period of the suspects arrested belong to a network to an isolated group and are soloists. this ratio was found particularly in the last investigation years from . of the soloists the majority are involved in thb within the netherlands and of the isolated groups . all the criminal networks are involved in cross border thb. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur adopted at a meeting of the council of europe in december . for a description of the criteria is referred to van dijk . organised crime thb certainly cross border thb requires a certain form of organisation. the question is however to what extent the criminal groups committing thb in the present research can be classed as organised crime . van dijk verified this by checking out the thb cases she studied against the definitions of and criteria for organised crime used by fijnaut the council of europe and klerks . according to these criteria the percentage of investigations that can be regarded as investigation into organised crime differ considerably. van dijk found that criminal groups involved in thb operate fairly traditionally. they try more to evade the upper world than to infiltrate it or go after economic or political power. also when carrying out the offence they show themselves to be conservative entrepreneurs . few new tricks techniques or strategies but rather walking known paths that have proved successful. also inherent in the offence traffickers in human beings have a large operating area from a geographic point of view. they often belong to extensive and widely branched networks. many criminal groups are characterised by violence usually against victims but also against other group members and competitors. the most serious defensive contra strategy that the criminal groups use consists of threatening victims who want to report an offence. other commonly used measures to prevent or counteract being traced include using false and or alternating identities for perpetrators and victims and frequently moving victims through the netherlands and europe. . modus operandi of traffickers in human beings . . recruitment and countries of origin the thb process begins with the recruitment of victims in the netherlands or abroad. table . shows the countries where the victims in the investigations analysed were recruited. this table only shows the countries where was recruited comparatively frequently. a full list of all the recruitment countries is included in annex table . because traffickers in human beings may recruit in several countries the table does not add up to . police investigation into trafficking in human beings totals per column n and total . totals per column n and total . table . recruitment countries broken down by year recruitment countries total n n n n n n netherlands nigeria czech republic ukraine bulgaria russian federation poland moldavia romania in almost a third of the investigations the cases involve recruitment in the netherlands. comparatively often also is recruited in nigeria the czech republic ukraine bulgaria and the russian federation. comparatively the number of investigations in which victims were recruited in moldavia bulgaria and the russian federation increased last year. victims are often recruited in a number of countries. for this reason table . classes the countries of origin of the foreign victims by region of origin. as recruitment is often carried out in central and eastern europe this region is broken down into central europe poland the czech republic slovakia hungary eastern europe the former soviet union the baltic states estonia latvia lithuania and the balkans countries from former yugoslavia romania bulgaria albania . as traffickers in human beings may recruit in several regions the table does not add up to . table . regions of recruitment broken down by year region of recruitment total n n n n n n western europe central europe trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur region of recruitment total the differences are not significant. eastern europe baltic states balkans africa latin america asia including caribbean victims are recruited comparatively often in central europe closely followed by eastern europe and the balkans. in addition africa scores high in one sixth of the investigations also there is recruited. the percentage of victims per region of recruitment fluctuates from year to year. the regions of origin among these victims virtually correspond with the regions of origin as recorded by the stv and the regions of origin of victims and witnesses of thb who make use of the b regulation see table . . recruitment in countries with no visa obligation it is conceivable that the choice of recruitment countries is related to the fact of whether victims from a country are obliged to have a visa or not. a check was therefore made as to what extent when is recruited abroad recruitment is carried out in countries with and with no visa obligation. for this the visa status of the recruitment countries at the start of the investigation was assumed. the result is shown in table . . this table distinguishes between investigations for which recruitment is carried out in countries with a visa obligation countries with no visa obligation and both. table . also breaks down the data by year. police investigation into trafficking in human beings and respectively. table . recruitment in countries with out a visa obligation broken down by year recruitment countries total n n n n n n without visa obligation with visa obligation with and without visa obligation total in over a fifth of all the cases investigated in which victims are recruited abroad recruitment is only carried out in countries without a visa obligation and in two fifths in both countries with and without a visa obligation. also in two fifths of the investigations recruitment is only carried out in countries with a visa obligation. the percentage of investigations in which recruitment is only or also carried out in countries without a visa obligation remained virtually constant in recent years namely around . these data say nothing directly about the number of victims that are recruited in countries with and without a visa obligation in the one case more victims are recruited bought than in other cases. for some countries of origin the visa obligation was abolished during the investigation period. in the present research investigations are surveyed where victims were recruited in among other things one of these countries. fourteen of these investigations were started before the visa obligation was abolished and also investigations after the visa obligation was abolished. it therefore seems that whether or not a visa obligation exists does not play a direct part in the choice of recruitment in a particular country. . . travel route and travel and residence documents travel route and border crossing travel routes to the netherlands in the case of cross border thb vary considerably on the one hand due to the differences in countries of origin but also because criminal groups are always trying out new travel routes van dijk . from the continents of africa america and asia victims always come by plane but not always flying directly to the netherlands. from central and eastern europe the journey is usually entirely over land. table . shows per year where the border with the netherlands trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur in the study by van dijk this question was left out in the last phase of the research. on the request of ppm dnp the question was added back into the questionnaire. the data on the year therefore are not complete. totals per column n and total . or the trafficker in human beings and or the operator of a sex establishment for the victims. totals per column n and total . was crossed. because the border crossing within one investigation may be made in several ways the table does not add up to . table . border crossing broken down by year border total n n n n n n country germany country belgium schiphol airport in two thirds of the investigations it emerged that victims are also brought to the netherlands over land via germany in one third also over land via belgium. almost one fifth of the investigations show that victims also enter the netherlands via schiphol. travel documents table . shows for all the investigations involving cross border thb to what extent the victims are in possession of a valid false or forged passport. because within one investigation different victims may carry different identity documents the table does not add up to . table . passport of victims broken down by year passport total n n n n n n genuine valid forged false none police investigation into trafficking in human beings investigations in which the latter was the case are included in the forged false passports . n . because in an investigation different victims may carry a number of visas with them the percentages do not add up to . corresponding numbers valid visa forged false visa no visa . in and in . n and respectively. in almost two thirds of the investigations into cross border thb one or more victims emerge that have a forged or false passport. van dijk found that the falsification of passports is often carried out by separate criminal groups. for a false passport according to the data available in the research one has to pay out to . african traffickers in human beings use a lot of valid passports that are used by a number of victims of similar appearance look a likes . a check has been made as to whether victims recruited in countries with a visa obligation are in possession of a visa upon arrest reporting and if so what. this shows that visas are forged or copied comparatively much less than passports in of the cases investigated . usually a visa is applied for in of cases or people travel without a visa in of cases . it is only possible to break down these data by year to a limited extent because in particular for many investigations completed in the years to these data are missing. for this reason these data are only given for the years and the percentage of investigations where people travel with a valid visa fell from in to in . the percentage of investigations where people travelled without a visa from a country for which a visa was compulsory increased on the other hand from in to in . the percentage of investigations where a forged or false visa was used remained more or less the same. . . exploitation in prostitution traffickers in human beings use many means of coercion to bring or keep people in prostitution and or to confiscate their earnings. it was examined how the victims are brought to prostitute themselves and or how a situation may arise in which they must hand over all their money. the result is shown in table . . this table breaks down the means of coercion used by the year in which the investigation was completed. because traffickers in human beings may use several means of coercion the table does not add up to . trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur totals per column n and total . and respectively in the case of cross border thb versus and for thb within the netherlands. the differences are significant respectively chi df p . chi df p . . in the case of thb within the netherlands versus for cross border thb. the difference is significant chi . df p . . table . means of coercion broken down by year means of coercion total n n n n n n taking away passports threat of violence physical threat of making prostitution work known threat of violence against victim s family violence physical fake love voodoo fictitious debt watching locking up victims of thb are very often threatened with violence to force them to continue to work in prostitution for the trafficker in human beings and or to hand over the money they have earned. according to many investigations the suspects also often actually use violence against the victims. in addition victims are according to many investigations locked up or constantly watched . taking away passports and imposing fictitious debts occurs mainly in the case of cross border thb. in the case of thb within the netherlands more often than for cross border thb victims are incited to prostitution with carefully planned played out love techniques. victims from nigeria and malawi also report voodoo practices. it is not possible to discern clear developments over time the means of coercion used vary from year to year. police investigation into trafficking in human beings total numbers per column n and total . mobility a characteristic of thb is that victims are set to work in different places within and outside the netherlands. firstly to meet the demand for always new girls in the prostitution world. secondly to prevent tracing by the police and to prevent victims making social contact van dijk . table . shows in which countries outside the netherlands and outside the country of origin the victims have worked in prostitution. this table only mentions the commonest countries. the results are also given by investigation year. table . destination countries broken down by year destination total n n n n n n not in prostitution elsewhere put in prostitution elsewhere germany belgium italy spain france in half of the investigations it emerges that victims have also been put into prostitution elsewhere in europe or outside it. in addition the victims are sold on sometimes even several times van dijk . this percentage remained fairly stable in recent years. victims who are put into prostitution outside the netherlands and outside the country of origin end up most often also in germany. other countries that score comparatively high are belgium italy and spain. the top most common destination countries outside the netherlands remained the same from . victims of cross border thb are more often brought into prostitution outside the netherlands and the country of origin than victims of thb within the netherlands against . in the case of thb within the netherlands this virtually always involves prostitution in the neighbouring countries germany and belgium while trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur this is not always known by the police people interviewed. in view of the enormous mobility in the sector this is probably an underestimate. total numbers per column n and total . victims of cross border thb are also put to work in countries other than these both within and outside the eu. two thirds of all investigations concern cases where victims where known are also employed in different towns in the netherlands. . prostitution sectors involved in a thb case different prostitution sectors may be involved such as window prostitution clubs brothels private houses the escort sector and street prostitution. table . shows which prostitution sectors were involved in the thb cases investigated broken down by the year in which the investigation was completed. because an investigation may relate to several sectors the percentages do not add up to . table . prostitution sectors involved broken down by year prostitution sector total n n n n n n window prostitution clubs brothels escort street prostitution in well over half of the investigations it emerges that victims are also employed in window prostitution and in well over half also in clubs brothels. comparatively fewer investigations focused on the escort sector and or street prostitution. in the number of investigations focused on the escort sector did however increase comparatively after a low point in . van dijk studied for the period to what extent the prostitution sector was involved in thb that means to what extent operators of sex establishments were guilty of criminal acts relating to thb or knew of these. according to a quarter of the investigations operators were aware of the exploitation situation in which the victims found themselves but were not actively involved in this. also in a quarter of the investigations the operators were regarded as traffickers in human beings that means that they played an active part in parts of the thb police investigation into trafficking in human beings standard deviation and n respectively . . . . . and . total . standard deviation and n respectively . . . . . and . total . standard deviation and n respectively . . . . and . . process such as the recruitment and trade of victims or placing holding victims in prostitution by force. for and this fact was not investigated. for questions about this will come up again in the questionnaire. . victims of trafficking in human beings number and type of victims in the investigations completed in the period to inclusive in total victims made a statement. table . presents the number of victims that made a statement and for whom this led to an investigation sent in to the pps. these data are also broken down by year and type of thb cross border and within the netherlands . table . statements of victims of thb broken down by year and type of thb year cross border thb thb within the netherlands total n average n average n average . . . . . . . . . . . . . . total . . the number of statements in investigations completed increased particularly in the last investigation year like the number of investigations completed in that year. the average number of statements per investigation hardly changed with the exception of a peak in . this peak is caused by one investigation with many reports of offences. table . presents the number of and percentage of investigations involving one or more underage victims broken down by the year in which the investigations were completed and by type of thb. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur art. e penal code considerably amended on march . table . investigations with underage victims broken down by year and type thb year cross border thb thb within the netherlands total n n n total percentage of the total number of investigations into the relevant type of thb in the relevant year percentage of the total number of investigations in the relevant year in total two fifths of the investigations partly related to underage victims. this percentage fluctuates per year. how many underage victims are involved in these investigations was not researched. van dijk did do this for the period . this was that is of the total number of victims that reported thb in this period and for which the investigation was completed and sent in. the number of underage victims seems to be significantly greater in the case of thb within the netherlands than in the case of cross border thb. in the whole research period only one investigation into thb involved male victims. this case is described in by van dijk . . proceeds of trafficking in human beings during or after an investigation into thb a decision may be made to try to confiscate the gain acquired illegally by the perpetrators. to do this as established in the plukze act a criminal financial investigation cfi is carried out. table . shows how often in the investigations into thb a cfi was opened and how often this has led to a confiscation order. data regarding the confiscation orders instituted have however only been collected for and . in of the cases investigated consideration was still being given to whether a cfi would be opened. these cases are not included in table . . police investigation into trafficking in human beings this was not known for of the cases. on average illegally acquired gain per suspect per year . in some cases income was also generated from criminal activities other than thb. when that is the case an attempt was made to separate the proceeds of thb from other sources. the proceeds mentioned in the table then only relate to thb. table . financial investigation and confiscation broken down by year year criminal financial investigation confiscation order instituted n n n a n a n a n a n a n a total percentage of the total number of investigations in the relevant year percentage of the number of cfis in the relevant year s . the total percentage of the confiscation orders is calculated over the cfis in and in one third of the investigations into thb a cfi was opened. this percentage remained virtually constant in the last investigation years. the percentage of investigations for which the cfi results in a confiscation order was higher in than in namely against in . in its first report bnrm checked on how many of the cases registered with the pps suspects in the period to the first half of in which a summons was issued led to a confiscation order. this was found to apply in of cases. it is stated that this does not at first sight seem very often but that information from pps data shows that this happened in the same period regarding infringement of the opium act in no more than of cases. the illegally acquired gain in the cases in the period for which this is known taking everything together rounds up to almost . on average this rounds up to per case and per suspect. the average illegally acquired gain per suspect varies considerably per investigation year and was the highest in at in round figures. because the illegally acquired gain is not calculated in every case the police officials interviewed were asked to estimate how much the suspects have earned in total from thb. this was done in the light of possessions found and distinguished lifestyle of the suspect s number of victims that they ran and the period that the victims were exploited in prostitution. in this way the proceeds were estimated for virtually all the cases investigated. the result is shown in table . . trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur . altink van dijk . numbers per year and . percentages per year and . table . proceeds of thb per investigation broken down by year proceeds in total n n n n n n less than to more than total half of the investigations involve cases where more than is earned by thb. this fluctuates little per year. van dijk estimated the total proceeds of thb by starting from the number of months that the estimated victims of thb see paragraph . worked in prostitution in at . another possibility is to estimate the annual proceeds of thb by multiplying the number of estimated victims in that year by the average gross annual earnings of a prostitute in the netherlands. calculated in this way in thb yielded a rounded gross amount of . on the one hand payments to operators of sex establishments and victims still have to be deducted from this after all in one third of cases according to van dijk something is paid to the victims out of the money they have earned and not all victims work a whole year in prostitution. on the other hand victims of thb probably earn more than the average prostitute because they are often forced to work many long days. the amount mentioned must therefore be seen as a rough indication of the amount that is earned from thb. damage claim victims a check was made as to how many victims have tried via civil law proceedings or via a civil joinder in the criminal proceedings to get back some of the money they have earned. this is found to be the case as far as is known in cases . of these cases were completed in the last year of the research. the percentage of victims that submit a claim remains roughly the same in as in previous years. the extent of the amounts demanded and awarded is usually not known to the police. police investigation into trafficking in human beings totals per column n and total . . criminal activities other than trafficking in human beings a check was made as to whether the suspects in the studied investigations also carry out other criminal activities. the result is shown in table . . this table does not take into account activities committed to support thb such as committing violence rape unlawful detention falsification of or fraud with travel and residence documents. because traffickers in human beings may carry out several criminal activities the table does not add up to . table . criminal activities in addition to thb broken down by year activities total n n n n n n no other activities other activities crimes against property narcotics weapons related crimes migrant smuggling financial crime in around half of the thb cases investigated the suspects are also suspected of offences other than thb. this percentage is higher in the last year of the research than in previous years. high scoring secondary criminal activities are crimes against property and narcotics related crimes. a number of suspects are also involved in weapons related crimes. these are comparatively often suspects of former yugoslav nationality van dijk . in the number of investigations in which thb was combined with crimes against property increased considerably compared with . the analyses were on the request of bnrm made by the statistics and policy analysis department siba of the scientific research and documentation centre wodc of the ministry of justice. reference date june . this includes cases dropped at a later stage of the proceedings by the pps and cases in which ultimately no suspicion of thb is included in the charges. prosecution . introduction this chapter contains information on thb cases registered with the pps. . research method to get an idea of the progress of criminal proceeding of thb cases analyses were carried out on the national database of pps data. with the help of pps data it is possible to get an idea of the progress of cases in the first instance. there are no data on a possible appeal phase. pps data contain details of cases and offences. unlike in the preceding chapter on police investigation a criminal case is understood here to mean the case against one suspect. furthermore it involves exclusively the offences for which principle charges are brought offences for which alternative charges are brought are not included in pps data. it also emerges that where principle charges are brought for several offences only the first offence is recorded in pps data. . trafficking in human beings cases registered with the public prosecution service over the period from to inclusive criminal cases were registered with the pps involving only or partly a suspicion of thb. table . indicates how many cases this involves per year and how many of these cases partly relate to underage victims. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur these are as in the first report all cases including cases transferred to another district . these are in total nine varying in number per year from none to four in . these are in respectively four and two more than indicated in the first report for that year. these relate to cases received afterwards. the information on these cases is incorporated in the above and following tables. provisional data for source printout of the national office of the pps reference date november make it clear that for that year a considerable growth in the total number of cases registered with the pps relating to suspicion of thb can be expected. for this the same categories are used as in the first report namely only a form of thb art. ter or a penal code thb in combination with participation in a criminal organisation art. penal code thb in combination with certain forms of violence. counted here are forms of both physical and mental violence such as intentional unlawful detention taking of hostages kidnapping and abduction rape mistreatment manslaughter and murder thb combined with forms of fraud and racketing such as false passport document forgery and bigamy thb combined with offences specifically against children with the exception of thb with minors as victims such as intercourse with children under years of age using or offering young people for pornography and inciting minors to vice. looked at in retrospect categories and are unfortunately not clearly enough distinguished some of the offences of a sexual nature against children are included in category others in category thb combined with offences that involve immigration law aspects such as migrant smuggling thb combined with one other type of offence not belonging to one of the above mentioned categories such as violation of the opium act theft and illegal entry into a dwelling and thb combined with table . number of registered cases and cases that partly involve underage victims per year year registered cases cases that partly involve underage victims n n total the number of registered cases varies per year. the increase highlighted in the first report in the number of cases that partly involve underage victims does not continue in . as indicated at the start of this paragraph the studied cases involve suspicion of only or partly thb. table . gives an idea of the combination of offences of which the people in question were suspected. prosecution several other types of offences. this may be a combination of thb with several of the above mentioned offences and or with several other crimes. the percentages amounted in the successive years to to and respectively. there can then be no question of a clear increase or reduction in the proportion of women among the suspects over the years but there was a peak in . table . overview of suspicions per year suspicion total n n n n n n n n only thb thb criminal organisation thb violence thb fraud thb offence against child thb immigration law offence thb one other type of offence thb several other types of offences total well over a third of the cases involved suspicion of only thb the first row in the table . of cases involved suspicion of thb in combination with one other type of offence rows to together . this was comparatively often a form of violence or membership of a criminal organisation. of cases involved suspicion of thb in combination with several other types of offences row in the table . compared with the preceding years showed an increase in suspicion of thb in combination with immigration law offences and a reduction in thb in combination with several other types of offences. . the suspects the suspects of thb are usually men namely in of cases. per year the proportion of female suspects varied from in to in . trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur this differentiation is made because the same person may be suspected of several thb offences. fell in the age category to years in the category to years and in the category to years. in the successive years respectively . . and of the suspects were born in the netherlands. an accent indicates that this involves a shared position. the age of the suspects at the time of their first act of thb of which they were suspected was in over of the cases somewhere between and years and was on average around years. from to inclusive there were underage suspects. they account for of the total number of suspects. in the average age of the suspects was a bit higher than in the years before this. the proportion of young suspects aged up to years was in that year compared with and in the years to inclusive. the country of birth of the suspects was often not the netherlands. the percentages of suspects born in the netherlands varied from in to in . countries of birth that frequently occurred among the suspects are shown in table . . also shown per year of registration with the pps is the ranking of the first five positions. table . ranking of frequently occurring countries of birth of suspects per year of registration country total rank rank rank rank rank rank rank n rank netherlands yugoslavia turkey morocco hungary soviet union poland albania nigeria bulgaria the list shows in addition to a constant first place for the netherlands as country of birth and a reasonably stable position of yugoslavia turkey and morocco certain more time related developments. examples of these are the comparatively less prosecution these are albania the former deutsche demokratische republik ddr bulgaria estonia hungary yugoslavia latvia lithuania poland romania the former soviet union and former czechoslovakia. a separate category is made here because the netherlands recruited many guest workers in these countries in the past. these are angola egypt ghana gold coast guinea the cape verde islands liberia niger nigeria portuguese west africa rwanda sudan and tunisia. this covers the former overseas territories from which suspects come. these are belgium germany france greece ireland italy austria portugal and spain. these are argentina brazil colombia and the dominican republic. these are the philippines pakistan thailand and vietnam. these are iraq iran jordan lebanon palestine and syria. this also includes the category international area . often occurrence of hungary as country of birth after and the seemingly temporary rise of nigeria as a country of origin of suspects since in nigeria no longer occupies a prominent place among the countries of birth. when interpreting this table one must consider that a country of origin may score high at one time because several people operating separately from one another have been arrested but also because one large network with a lot of suspects from the same country of origin has been rounded up. table . offers a rather different view of the backgrounds of the suspects in which their countries of birth are classified by region and are then shown by year of registration. the same breakdown was chosen as in the previous report namely a the netherlands b central and eastern europe c turkey and morocco d africa e surinam the dutch antilles and indonesia f europe other g central and south america h asia i the middle east j the united states and k unknown other . table . region of origin of suspects per year of registration region of origin total n n n n n n n n netherlands central and eastern europe turkey and morocco africa surinam dutch antilles and indonesia europe other trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur region of origin total central and south america asia middle east united states other unknown total around of the suspects were born in the netherlands also around came originally from central or eastern europe from turkey or morocco and from africa. in total of the suspects came from the other regions of origin together rows to in the table . the slow rise highlighted in the previous report in the proportion of suspects from africa seen up to has not continued in . the proportion of suspects from central and eastern europe on the other hand increased considerably in and amounts to almost double the number of suspects born in the netherlands. . handling by the public prosecution service table . gives a summary per year of registration of the number of cases in which the suspect is remanded in custody. table . remand in custody per year of registration remand in custody total n n n n n n n n yes no unknown total in over three quarters of the cases varying per year from to the suspect was detained when the case was brought to court. prosecution this is then contrary to the first report in which the year of registration even where this involved handling and judgement always served as the starting point. the difference between the number of cases registered with the pps and the number of cases dealt with by the pps is due to the fact that the pps has not yet taken a follow up decision in all cases. by way of explanation some of the cases registered at the end of will not be dealt with by the pps until . to another district or abroad. important grounds for discharge are no legal evidence wrongly reported as suspect small share in the offence and old offence . the latter of course only occurs in case of suspicion of thb in combination with other types of offences. table . shows how the pps handles cases. in the above this involved the criminal cases registered over the period to inclusive. table . involves the cases handled by the pps over the period to inclusive. table . handling by the pps per year of handling handling total n n n n n n n n summons for thb uncondition al discharge summons because of other offences transfer conditional discharge joinder out of court settlement total in cases that partly relate to suspicion of thb summons is by far the most frequent method of handling the case. in over a quarter of cases the case was unconditionally discharged and in of cases a summons was served for other offences. the other forms of settlement transfer conditional discharge and bargain are only used sporadically. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur mention is purposely made of the same period and not of the same cases . because time passes between registration and handling by the pps and also between handling by the pps and the judgement of the court this does not always involve the same cases. these are not then precisely the same cases as those registered in the same period by the pps or dealt with by the pps. in particular some of the cases dealt with further in the past will have been brought to court in preceding years by the pps. and some of the cases handled in by the pps will only come to court in at the earliest . . judgement by the court over the same period to inclusive the court dealt with a total of thb cases in the first instance . table . gives a summary of the judgements per year of judgement. table . judgement in the first instance per year of judgement judgement total n n n n n n n n sentence imposed acquittal pps not admissible joined to court sitting acquittal on a point of law or exemption total in a large majority of the summoned cases a sentence was imposed. in of cases acquittal followed. these percentages do not differ from one another much per year though there were comparatively more acquittals in . the judgement is also interesting seen by the combination of offences in the charge. table . gives an overview of the judgements from the years to inclusive. prosecution in cases in the category no main sentence an additional penalty may be imposed for example confiscation or a measure for example detention order . table . judgement per combination of offences offence combination sentence imposed acquittal pps not admissible joined to court sitting acquittal on a point of law or exemption total n n n n n n only thb thb criminal organisation thb violence thb fraud thb offence against children thb immigration law offence thb one other type of offence thb several other types of offences total table . shows by combination of offences what main sentences were imposed. table . main sentences imposed per combination of offences offence combination uncondi tional imprison ment community service uncondi tional fine only conditional imprison ment no main sentence total n n n n n n only thb thb criminal organisation thb violence thb fraud trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur offence combination uncondi tional imprison ment community service uncondi tional fine only conditional imprison ment no main sentence total n n n n n n the indication additional sentence is rather misleading. in accordance with art. para. penal code the court may however in cases in which the law permits a sentence to be imposed pass only an additional sentence. standard deviation . months. standard deviation . months. standard deviation . months. thb offence against children thb immigration law offence thb one other type of offence thb several other types of offences total in of cases in which sentences were imposed this was imprisonment in of cases in combination with an unconditional fine and in of cases this was community service. unconditional fines only conditional sentence or only additional sentences or measures were only occasionally imposed. the unconditional imprisonment has an average duration of months . this average is the lowest for charges of suspicion of only thb . months and the highest for charges of suspicion of thb in combination with several types of offences months . . appeal an appeal was brought against of the total of court judgements . that was done times by the suspect in almost all cases after sentence was imposed times by the pps mainly in case of acquittal and times by both parties in all cases after sentence was imposed . other figures this chapter outlines different figures relating to thb as they emerge in various publications. this outline also includes figures relating to prostitution because according to the regulations now applicable in the netherlands thb is still placed in the context of exploitation only in the sex industry. the purpose of this outline is to offer a brief efficient overview of available indicators relating to prostitution and thb. table . only presents figures that relate to the whole of the netherlands. figures that relate to abroad are not included in the table. figures in relation to municipalities regions etc. are also left out of account. the figures presented in table . relate to the year under which they are placed. if data are known or calculated over a period of several years then the table cells for these years are combined. if a report states that this is an annually recurring number then the number is placed under the year of publication of the report. the figures in most cases can be commented on in one way or the other. for example in the publications in which the figures are presented factors are mentioned that affect the reliability and or level of the figures. also an explanation is often given of the way in which or the method by which the figures have been collected or calculated. it has nevertheless been decided in this chapter not to give an explanation of the figures. the reader is referred to the sources mentioned to check how precisely a figure came about and what the reliability of the data presented is. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur table . indicators of prostitution and thb in the netherlands data prostitution thb source prostitution number of prostitutes van der helm van mens visser e.a. per day number of foreign prostitutes iii van der helm van mens min. number of underage prostitutes venicz vanwesenbeeck girls min. van gelder boys van horn e.a. boys number of boys men in prostitution van gelder minors van der helm van mens van horn e.a. minors number of trans genders in prostitution van der helm van mens number of brothels smallenbroek smits visser e.a. number of window brothelsiv smallenbroek smits number of windows visser e.a. number of escort agencies smallenbroek smits number of street prostitutes visser e.a. per day other figures data prostitution thb source thb number of victims of thb reported to stv stv number of victims of thb in contact with victim support nrm number of victims witnesses of thb in b bnrm ind number of victims of thb altink irt non from central and eastern europe van dijk min. number of underage victims of thb nrm number of underage victims of thb in contact with victim support nrm number of reports of thb nat. crime chart klpdv bnrmi number of current investigations into thb van de ven neeve luykx van soest ppm dnpvi van dijk trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur data prostitution thb source number of completed investigations into thb bnrm sent in to pps number of suspects of thb nat. crime chart klpdv bnrmi reported bnrmi sent in to pps number of cases suspects of thb bnrm number of sentences imposed for thb bnrm estimated i in investigations completed and sent in to the pps ii in clubs and in window and street prostitution iii not necessarily working illegally in prostitution iv a window brothel may have several windows in operation v information from the national crime chart is partly taken from boerman e.a. and partly from verbal information from the klpd nri service vi as far as is known the results were not published in the form of a report. the data presented here come from a few separate summaries that the bureau nrm obtained via the ppm dnp abbreviations used in table . max. maximum min. minimum nat. national this concerns an analysis of the investigations into thb that the police completed in the period hereinafter called the police research an analysis of data regarding the victims witnesses that report an offence and make an appeal to the b regulation hereinafter called b research and an analysis carried out by the statistical information supply and policy analysis department siba of the scientific research and documentation centre wodc of a national database of cases registered with the public prosecution service pps hereinafter called the pps research . summary and conclusions . introduction this report charts figures relating to trafficking in human beings thb . for this the bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on thb bnrm has firstly carried out its own research work and secondly collected figures as they emerge in publications. in this chapter the results are presented briefly and in relation to one another. the emphasis is placed here on the results for being the most recent complete reporting year and on developments over time. this report must be seen and read in conjunction with the first report that contains all sorts of background information and is of a more reflective nature. the conclusions and recommendations formulated in the first report still apply without restriction the cabinet viewpoint on them has only recently been published and they still had to be discussed in the lower house at the time of writing this second report. this report therefore only discusses to a limited degree the results obtained. also no further and far reaching conclusions are drawn and or recommendations formulated. in the next third report conclusions and recommendations will however again be formulated. before going into the results it is also important to state that the charting of the scale and character of thb in quantitative terms is a difficult task. after all an unknown proportion of thb escapes the eye of the various bodies involved directly or indirectly with thb. by finding out and presenting the data that are available an indication can however be obtained of the character and scale of the phenomenon of thb. . victims number of victims in the dutch foundation against trafficking in women stv registered victims of thb. the number of victims reported to the stv does however as regards character and scale form an unknown selection of the total number of victims of thb in the netherlands but also of the number of victims that come into contact with the trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur see for an explanation of this regulation paragraph . and paragraph . . police and victim support organisations. the latter is caused on the one hand because not all victims known to third parties are reported to the stv. on the other hand because in the course of the stv was less easily contactable. other sources then indicate higher numbers of victims of thb. for example the bnrm found that in victims came into contact with victim support organisations nrm . victims may have been counted several times here after all they may be in contact with several victim support organisations but this distortion is probably partly offset again because not all victim support organisations in the netherlands have provided data for this investigation. on the basis of the records mentioned and others different researchers have attempted to estimate the total number of victims in the netherlands. the most recent estimate comes from van dijk who calculated that the number of victims in the netherlands in would be at least . this would mean that at least one fifth of all prostitutes according to legal criteria are victims of thb. earlier estimates related to and . these estimates range from victims of thb in total to also only from central and eastern europe. underage victims there are various estimates and figures available for the number of minors in prostitution and the number of victims of thb among them. the most recent estimate for is that there are to underage victims of thb in the netherlands to of the total number of underage prostitutes venicz vanwesenbeeck in first report of the dutch national rapporteur on thb nrm . bnrm found that in at least underage victims of thb were in contact with victim support organisations nrm . in the immigration and naturalisation service ind registered applications from minors applying for a residence permit under the b regulation. these minors however also include children of victims and witnesses. in underage victims were reported to the stv. in of the police investigations completed and sent in related to underage victims. this also applied for of the cases registered with the public prosecution service pps suspects . this at first sight remarkable difference between the police and the pps data is probably caused because a not all underage victims have also reported an offence b not all suspects identified in an investigation that partly related to underage victims also themselves might be suspected of trafficking in minors and c the selection within the pps database was carried out by selection of the paragraphs of articles ter and a penal code that relate to underage victims while cases that partly relate to underage victims may also be registered under the general penal code article or under other paragraphs. male victims the number of men boys among prostitutes is comparatively low according to estimates to of the total number of prostitutes in the netherlands van der summary and conclusions helm van mens venicz vanwesenbeeck . also men boys as is generally assumed e.g. in van gelder are much less often victims of thb than women girls. of the investigations into thb completed by the police over the period one investigation also related to boys. of the people who in made an appeal for the b regulation in fact were of the male sex but these may in part also be witnesses of thb. the stv only very occasionally receives reports of men boys that are exploited in prostitution. origin of victims or recruitment countries victims of thb are recruited in the netherlands and or abroad. in the first case this is called thb within the netherlands in the second case cross border thb. of the investigations that the police completed in related to thb within the netherlands and to cross border thb. the majority of the foreign victims to in both and previous years came from central and eastern europe. in second place comes africa where to of the victims come from. asia latin america and western europe score comparatively low. in all the records researches bulgaria the czech republic poland the russian federation ukraine and romania emerge as major countries of origin in central and eastern europe in . the stv also mentions lithuania in the b research slovakia also scores comparatively high and in the police research moldavia jumps out as a rising country of origin . for a number of these countries in there was no visa obligation bulgaria the czech republic poland romania lithuania slovakia for others there was the russian federation ukraine moldavia . whether or not a visa obligation exists does not seem to play a great part in the decision to recruit in a particular country. reports by victims prosecution of thb may also be carried out without reporting an offence. however a report is in practice often considered to be vital. of the number of victims of thb who report an offence different records are available. none of these data do however give an accurate or complete picture of the actual situation. nevertheless the results are briefly set out here. firstly the police identification service system hks obtained via the national crime chart . this records reports of thb in . secondly the records of the ind of victims and witnesses that reported an offence and wanted to use the b regulation. there were in . thirdly the reports of thb by victims that in led to the cases suspects sent in to the pps. these were . this latter number is the highest while this is a selection of victims that come into contact with the police who decide to report an offence for which the report leads to a police investigation and this investigation is also again completed and sent in to the pps. when the number of reports in is combined with the estimate of victims in van dijk then it is found that of the victims of thb would report an offence. this corresponds reasonably well with estimates of police officials and victim support organisations regarding the percentage of thb victims found that trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur sources include various police officials involved in the fight of thb among others from ppm dnp and the foundation for support and reception of prostitutes stichting hulpverlening en opvang prostituees shop . report an offence. they assume a readiness among these victims to report an offence of to . . perpetrators perpetrators or suspects in the police identified suspects of thb of which were arrested and were sent in to the pps. the number of suspects rose considerably in the last two years but similar to the number of investigations that the police completed. the average number of suspects per investigation remained more or less the same over the period and even fell in . also a check was made with the pps on how many cases suspects were registered in . there are of these. the difference with the number of suspects sent in from the police research is so small that no research consequences in terms of unreliability have to be associated with this. according to the police research of the suspects arrested in are women. the proportion of women among the suspects increased comparatively over the last two years. of the suspects registered with the pps in are women. furthermore of all the suspects arrested in operate a sex establishment. of the operators of sex establishments arrested were sent in to the pps. origin of suspects according to the police research almost half of the suspects arrested in are of dutch nationality. some of these were however born outside the netherlands. a high proportion of suspects in came from former yugoslavia albania nigeria and to a lesser degree ghana. suspects of thb within the netherlands come comparatively more often from morocco than suspects of cross border thb. in the pps research in addition to former yugoslavia bulgaria turkey and the former soviet union emerge as the main countries of origin of suspects in . in according to the police research the percentage of foreign suspects residing illegally in the netherlands rose compared with foreign suspects legally residing that is with a residence permit or in some other legal way in the netherlands from to . though foreign suspects without a residence permit do not come significantly more often from countries without than from countries with a visa obligation. to what extent the lifting of the visa obligation for applicant member states of the eu can be seen in the origin of suspects of thb will be further examined in the next report of the nrm. summary and conclusions co operation the majority of the suspects arrested in belong to a criminal network. these criminal networks are usually extensive and widely branched and bring their victims into prostitution in several countries in the european union eu . in of police investigations focused on branches of criminal networks . in that same year soloists were traced and isolated criminal groups see for the definitions paragraph . . . modus operandi in this paragraph a few data relating to the modus operandi of traffickers in human beings are summarised. only data from the police research are presented here. much more about the way in which traffickers in human beings operate can of course be said on the basis of other sources. this was partly done in the first report of the dutch national rapporteur on thb nrm and the nri report thb in the netherlands van dijk . the data presented below form a supplement or update to the data already presented on the mechanisms of thb. travel route and travel and residence documents the journey usually takes place by land via germany. this only seems logical in view of the fact that most victims come from central and eastern europe see paragraph . . very regularly victims in the netherlands were in possession of a forged or false passport. it is not clear whether the same passport is also used for the journey to the netherlands. as far as is known visas are forged or counterfeited much less often than passports. usually a visa is applied for or the person travels without a visa. exploitation in prostitution traffickers in human beings use many means of coercion to bring or hold people in prostitution and or to confiscate their earnings. victims are very often threatened with violence or violence is actually used. furthermore victims are often locked up kept under constant surveillance or their freedom is otherwise restricted. the taking away of passports and the imposition of fictitious debts mainly occurs in the case of cross border thb. in the case of thb within the netherlands victims are more often than for cross border thb enticed into prostitution with carefully planned played out lover boy techniques the loverboy method . victims from nigeria and malawi report voodoo practices. mobility in half of the police investigations involved cases where victims were brought into prostitution not only in the netherlands but also elsewhere in europe relatively often in germany belgium italy and spain. in two thirds of the investigations it emerges that victims are also employed in various towns in the netherlands. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur for example committing violence rape unlawful detention and falsification or fraud with travel and residence documents. proceeds of thb the average illegally acquired gain per suspect was the highest in namely roughly . in an investigation the illegally acquired gain is however only calculated if the total amount of illegally earned money is considered substantial. the amount mentioned is as a result not necessarily representative of the earnings of the average trafficker in human beings. for this reason police officials in the police research were also asked to estimate how much the suspects distinguished in an investigation earned with the thb investigated. from this it emerges that in half of the investigations into thb completed in more than is estimated to be earned. in total in thb in the netherlands brought in an estimated gross amount of roughly see paragraph . for the calculation . in of the investigations victims have as far as the police know via civil law proceedings or via a joinder of injured party for material and immaterial damage in the criminal proceedings attempted to get back some of the money they have earned or to obtain compensation for damage suffered. characteristics of organised crime in of cases suspects registered by the pps in in addition to thb charges were also brought of belonging to a criminal organisation art. penal code . this indicates a lower limit and does not mean that in other cases there is no question of criminal organisations. for various reasons this charge is not in fact always brought. research by van dijk has shown that criminal groups and networks meet a number of but not all the characteristics of organised crime. it was for example found that they try to evade the upper world rather than try to infiltrate or aim for economic or political power. the area of operation from a geographic point of view is however generally large. many suspects and criminal groups are characterised by violence both towards victims and relations of victims often family and towards competing traffickers in human beings. measures often used to prevent or counteract tracing include threatening victims who want to report an offence the use of false and or alternating identities for perpetrators and victims and the frequent moving of victims through the netherlands and europe. criminal activities other than thb in over half of the investigations involved cases where the suspects also committed offences other than thb or thb related offences . crimes against properties and narcotics related crimes score high. some way behind follow weapons related crimes and migrant smuggling. that same year in well over two thirds of the cases suspects registered with the pps there was a suspicion of thb in combination with one of more other types of offences particularly violence or belonging to a criminal organisation . this percentage is higher than in the police research because thb related offences are regarded as a separate offence in the pps research. summary and conclusions . police investigation police investigation into thb the number of investigations into thb completed by the police rose considerably particularly in . in that year investigations were completed and suspects sent in to the pps. the immediate cause for the investigations was in one third of the cases a spontaneous report. in equal second place are controls in the prostitution environment and information from other investigations. on average an investigation into thb in took months. prostitution sectors involved in over half of the investigations it emerges that victims are also employed in window prostitution and in well over half also in clubs brothels. comparatively far fewer investigations were carried out that involved prostitution in the escort sector or street prostitution. in the number of investigations involving the escort sector did however increase comparatively greatly after a low point in . criminal financial investigation in one third of the investigations a criminal financial investigation was opened. the number of criminal financial investigations that led to a confiscation order in was higher than in namely against in . bnrm checked in its first report in how many cases a confiscation order was instituted out of the cases suspects registered over the period from to the first half of inclusive with the pps where a summons was issued. this was found to apply in of cases. it is stated that this does not appear often at first sight but information from pps data shows that this happened in no more than of cases in the same period with regard to infringement of the opium act. the b regulation foreign victims of thb residing illegally in the netherlands who report an offence and so co operate in the tracing and prosecution of the suspects are offered reception and a temporary residence status under the b regulation. the number of victims who obtain a residence status on this basis is recorded by the ind. for witnesses of thb a similar regulation applies. witnesses may themselves be have been victims of thb but do not have to be. because the ind makes no distinction in its records between victims and witnesses of thb the records of the ind cannot just be regarded as victim records. in for victims witnesses of thb a residence permit was applied for on the basis of the b regulation a b permit . the number of applications rose considerably in that year compared with previous years and this increase will very probably continue in . in b permits were granted. this means that in upon applications no b permit was awarded. there may be a number of reasons for this. for example applications are withdrawn or expire. this happens for example if the investigation and or the prosecution is not started or is stopped. it also happens that victims witnesses who report an offence or make a statement and make an appeal for the b regulation disappear before the trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur b status is granted. possibly victims return to their country of origin or go back to work in prostitution self employed or employed by traffickers in human beings. . prosecution in as previously stated in this chapter cases suspects relating to thb were registered with the pps. in of these cases a summons was issued because of suspicion of thb and in for acts other than thb. of the cases were un conditionally discharged. in cases relating to thb were settled by the court. in of these cases a sentence was imposed. this was in most cases imprisonment. . after the lifting of the general ban on brothels as of october with the lifting of the general ban on brothels the way was opened for the running of prostitution as a legal business. municipalities lay down conditions by means of a licensing system under which the running of prostitution can be permitted within their municipal borders. supervisors so far usually the police check whether the conditions are met. in many regions these checks are combined with controls for illegal immigrants. in these controls they are also on the look out for indications of thb. if prostitution businesses do not meet the conditions laid down administrative measures can be taken such as imposing a fine or temporary or otherwise closure of the premises. by regulating the prostitution sector in this way via an administrative path an attempt is made to make it as unattractive as possible for the sex establishment operator to employ victims of thb or to work with minors. this is in addition to the criminal law opportunities that have been present for many decades already. the figures presented in this report partly relate to the period after the lifting of the general ban on brothels. however the new approach to prostitution policy has not yet got off the ground in all municipalities see also daalder . furthermore in particular larger municipalities with a comparatively extensive prostitution industry did in fact run ahead of the lifting of the ban and already combined a tolerance situation with a type of licensing system. as a result the present data for the year cannot simply be interpreted as effects of the lifting of the general ban on brothels . to draw conclusions on this research with a broader set up is required. this has meanwhile been carried out by the scientific research and documentation centre wodc of the ministry of justice daalder . the results of this research and possible changes observed after the lifting of the general ban on brothels will be discussed in the next third report of the nrm. this bibliography contains an overview of the publications studied for writing the dutch version of this report. although the english translation is a somewhat abridged version for the readers information the bibliography is included in its entirety. bibliography altink s.m. . handel en wandel. malafide migratiebemiddeling van vrouwen in justiti le verkenningen jrg. nr . altink s.m. . opheffing bordeelverbod. een onderneming voor prostituees amsterdam de rode draad. boerman f.a. e.a. . landelijke criminaliteitskaart aangifte en verdachtenanalyse op basis van hks gegevens zoetermeer klpd. daalder a.l. . het bordeelverbod opgeheven prostitutie in den haag wodc. dijk e.m.h. van . mensenhandel in nederland zoetermeer klpd nri. dijk e.m.h. van savornin lohman p.m. de . externe evaluatie stichting tegen vrouwenhandel amsterdam dsp. fijnaut c.j.c.f. e.a. . inzake opsporing enqu te opsporingsmethoden bijlage vii eindrapport onderzoeksgroep fijnaut den haag sdu. gelder p. van . kwetsbaar kleurig en schaduwrijk. jongens in de prostitutie een verschijnsel in meervoud amsterdam thela thesis. helm th. van der mens l. van . mobility in prostitution in the netherlands amsterdam europap. horn j.e. van bullens r.a.r. doreleijers th.a.h. j gers m. . aard en omvang seksueel misbruik en prostitutie minderjarige allochtone jongens een verkennend onderzoek amsterdam fora vu amsterdam. irt non en internationaal politie instituut twente . mensenhandel vanuit centraal en oost europa enschede irt non. klerks p.p.h.m. . groot in de hasj. theorie en praktijk van de georganiseerde criminaliteit antwerpen kluwer rechtswetenschappen. trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur luykx f. soest s. van . inventarisatie prostitutie en mensenhandel in nederland zoetermeer werkgroep prostitutie en mensenhandel cri. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel mensenhandel eerste rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur den haag bureau nrm. riet f.j. van t . bronnenboek . inventarisatie van gegevensbronnen met betrekking tot criminaliteit den haag ministerie van justitie. smallenbroek a.j.h. smits e.c.m. . gemeentelijk prostitutiebeleid na opheffing van het algemeen bordeelverbod den haag vng sgbo. stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . jaarverslag utrecht stv. stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . jaarverslag utrecht stv. ven n. van de neefe m. . inventarisatie stand van zaken prostitutie en mensenhandel in nederland versie zoetermeer klpd. venicz l. vanwesenbeeck i. . aard en omvang van gedwongen prostitutie onder minderjarige allochtone meisjes utrecht nisso. visser j.h. oomens h.c.d.m. boerman f.a. . prostitutie in nederland in amsterdam mr. a. de graaf stichting. annex notes on tables statistics and terminology notes on the tables presented this report includes many tables. below are some comments that are important for the interpretation of these tables. due to rounding the tables do not always add up to exactly . for the sake of readability the tables do however always indicate . when numbers are set out in a column of a table in the heading of the relevant column the letter n is used an abbreviation for number . in the tables a dash shows that the number is zero and a dash also indicates that the corresponding percentage is . if the number is higher than zero but the percentage when rounded comes to is shown. notes on the statistics used standard deviation this report sometimes indicates what the average is for example the average number of suspects in investigations into thb. in addition the number n see above and the so called standard deviation are also always given. the standard deviation indicates the extent to which the numbers on which the average is calculated differ. the higher the standard deviation the more this is the case. this is not the place to discuss statistical methods at length. however a small example for clarification in a class ten people all get a for a test. the average report figure is then a the standard deviation is low. after all everyone scores the same. in another class five people get a for the test and five people a . here too the average is a . the standard deviation is however high here because the people get a very wide range of scores. index in some tables an index is given. the index shows how much the number of for example suspects has changed in a particular year compared with a base year. which year is taken as a base year is indicated in the heading of the table. this year is set at . an index of higher than indicates a rise with respect to the base year and an index of lower than a fall. for example an index of indicates that the number has doubled with respect to the base year. significance in this report results for different groups are sometimes compared with one another. if this is the case a check is usually made as to whether the difference found is significant or not. this is then indicated in the text with in a footnote the corresponding values chi df and p. this means that a check has been made as to how big the chance is that the difference found is based on coincidence. let us give a trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur fictitious example here too. say that there are three people who drink cola each day and three people who never drink cola. one person in the first group dies of a heart attack no one in the second group. is drinking cola related to having a heart attack this is difficult to say with so few people. there is a high chance that the result found is based on coincidence and that drinking cola has nothing to do with heart attacks. a test would then show that the difference is not significant. now there are people of which people drink cola and do not and cola drinkers from the first group die of a heart attack. the man in the street would say that cannot be down to chance . a statistical test would show this difference is significant . in this report it is assumed that the chance of coincidence may not be greater than a percentage often used in circles of researchers. exactly how big this chance is can be seen from the p value indicated in the footnote. for example p . means that the chance of a coincidence is less than . the values chi and df this stands for the number of degrees of freedom are values that are necessary to determine whether differences are significant and are not discussed further here. notes on terminology used victims of thb both women and girls and men and boys may become victims of thb. because most victims of thb according to the present dutch definition that is still related to exploitation in the sex industry are women and girls and to avoid complicated he she schemes in this report female victims are always referred to. cases recorded with the public prosecution service the pps records criminal cases which are cases against one suspect. because in theory several cases relating to one suspect may be registered with the pps the number of cases does not equate exactly with the number of suspects. because the numbers will not however differ much in practice for the sake of readability this report also talks about cases registered with the pps suspects . central and eastern europe this report sometimes talks of central and eastern europe as complementary to western europe and sometimes of the regions central and eastern europe which in the first case means the countries poland the czech republic slovakia hungary and in the second case countries from the former soviet union and the russian federation. if the latter is the case then this is always explicitly explained in the text. in other cases one can then assume the first alternative. annex supplementary tables supplementary table to chapter table nationality victims witnesses with application for b permit up to and including june nationality applications for b permit grants of b permit n n bulgarian ukrainian russian nigerian romanian czech polish lithuanian moldavian slovakian albanian cameroon latvian chinese estonian sierra leonese belarussian dominican german hungarian yugoslav moroccan thai angolese belgian ghanaian guinean bosnian colombian trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur nationality applications for b permit grants of b permit croatian malawian ugandan venezuelan brazilian finish greek italian ivorian kyrgyzian liberian uzbekian sudanese soviet union sri lankan surinamian turkish namibian afghan armenian indonesian jamaican congo kinshasan austrian spanish togolese trinidadan zairian zambian unknown total annex supplementary tables supplementary tables to chapter table standard deviations belonging to table . year suspects distinguished suspects arrested suspects sent in sd sd sd . . . . . . . . . . . . . . total . . . table nationality and country of birth of suspects of thb to inclusive country nationality country of birth n n netherlands former yugoslavia nigeria albania bulgaria turkey germany morocco czech republic romania ukraine slovakia estonia italy poland soviet union dominican republic lebanon trafficking in human beings second report of the dutch national rapporteur country nationality country of birth n n moldavia sudan thailand tunisia belgium colombia ghana greece hungary israel stateless algeria angola azerbaijan brazil liberia lithuania indonesia spain syria egypt great britain iraq dutch antilles surinam unknown total annex supplementary tables table recruitment countries total and in the last investigation year recruitment countries total n n netherlands nigeria czech republic ukraine bulgaria russian federation poland moldavia romania hungary lithuania slovakia latvia ghana white russia albania estonia malawi sierra leone dominican republic indonesia italy former yugoslavia thailand belgium colombia morocco azerbaijan brazil colophon reference dutch national rapporteur on thb . thb supplementary figures. second report of the dutch national rapporteur the hague bureau nrm. may bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on thb p.o. box nl eh the hague the netherlands tel. fax production and printing olf legal productions wlp nijmegen tilburg bureau nrm 