 doi . atr. the prominent role of national judges in interpreting the international definition of human trafficking luuk b esser and corinne e dettmei jer vermeulen abstract although there has been much discussion of the scope of the concept of human trafficking in international literature the part played by national courts in interpreting definitions based on the international definition of human trafficking in the un trafficking protocol has received little attention. when a judge interprets an offence he or she clarifies or adds new meaning to it. the space for this is even greater when the underlying definition is broadly formulated as in the case of the international definition of human trafficking. this article demonstrates that although this international definition establishes the outer parameters within which conduct must be made a criminal offence domestic courts still have room to flesh out the definition in national contexts. the role of national judges needs more consideration in today s discourse on the legal definition of human trafficking. keywords human trafficking definitions exploitation abuse of a position of vulnerability please cite this article as l b esser and c e dettmeijer vermeulen the prominent role of national judges in interpreting the international definition of human trafficking anti trafficking review issue pp. www.antitraffickingreview.org el papel destacado de las juezas y los jueces nacionales en la interpretaci n de la definici n internacional de trata de personas. luuk b esser y corinne e dettmei jer vermeulen resumen aunque se ha dicho mucho sobre el alcance del concepto de trata de personas a nivel internacional no se ha prestado mucha atenci n al papel desempe ado por las cortes nacionales en la interpretaci n de las definiciones bas ndose en la definici n internacional de trata de personas del protocolo de la onu contra la trata. cuando una jueza o juez interpreta un delito lo hace a adiendo un nuevo significado. el hueco para que esto ocurra es incluso mayor cuando la definici n subyacente es formulada de forma generalizada como es el caso de la definici n internacional de la trata de personas. este art culo demuestra que aunque la definici n internacional establece los par metros externos dentro de los que una conducta debe ser considerada un crimen las cortes nacionales tienen cierto margen para desarrollar la definici n en los contextos nacionales. el papel de las juezas y jueces nacionales necesita ser tenido en cuenta en el discurso actual sobre la definici n legal de la trata de personas. palabras clave trata de personas definiciones explotaci n y abuso de una situaci n de vulnerabilidad. definitions and the absence of the perspective of the national judge sixteen years after it was drafted the international definition of human trafficking in the trafficking protocol still causes controversy. many authors and organisations have addressed the complex issues related to the scope of the un general assemby protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organized crime november trafficking protocol . doi . atr. definition. for example how can abuse of a position of vulnerability be understood and what sort of evidence is needed in order to prove the definition s mens rea element i.e. the purpose of exploitation without any pretence of providing even a remotely comprehensive overview of the available literature it is possible to identify a number of streams in the current discourse about the concept of human trafficking. one stream seeks to find the similarities and nexuses between human trafficking and new and emerging phenomena that are not at present commonly associated with it. in this regard a article by tyldum is illustrative. in it she applies the definition of human trafficking to the already existing phenomenon of transnational marriages in norway and comes to understand the latter as directly related to the former. here the definition is used in a functionalistic way it serves as a framework to deepen the understanding of the characteristics of a previously presumed to be distinguishable concept and has as such the capacity to shed more conceptual light on other phenomena. a second stream in recent literature is characterised by the ongoing search for the parameters of the definition of human trafficking and related to this the most effective perspective on which to build policies. one of the main recent contributors in this respect is chuang who criticises the erosion of the definition s apparent boundaries and pleas for more careful consideration of its scope. subsequently chuang is as is shamir advocating a labour perspective or paradigm on human trafficking adding an approach that among other measures focusses on labour market regulation. for all the attention that has been devoted to the potential scope of the definition of human trafficking in theory far less has been written or is otherwise known about the role played by domestic courts in delineating the definition. although states are under an obligation to criminalise the act of human trafficking as laid down in article a of the trafficking protocol the definition of human trafficking is sufficiently flexible to enable it to be fleshed out in the local contexts of different countries. hence from the outset it was clear that national actors would play a pivotal role in searching for the definition s exact radius of action. naturally the object of interpretation at these national levels is the national definition. however bearing in mind the transnational background of this definition and the fact that most states have adopted language very similar to the international legal definition in formulating their understanding of trafficking national interpretations can also be insightful and valuable in an international context. especially where the national definition is closely aligned with the international counterpart it stems from interpretations and case law by national courts can be of importance for and add meaning to international debates about elements of the definition. of course the weight of influence should not be overstated and can only be properly understood as indirect. a useful analogy might be the concept of subsidiary means in the context of international criminal law. in article paragraph under d of the statute of the international court of justice it is stipulated that the court shall apply inter alia and subject to the provisions of article judicial decisions and the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations as subsidiary means for the determination of rules of law . more recently van der wilt described the domestic courts role vis vis international criminal law as follows by applying the law they the domestic courts refine interpret and therefore change the law and they contribute to the further development of international criminal law. to demonstrate the consequences of the space left open for judges the focus in this article is on the way dutch courts have interpreted the national human trafficking definition that was derived from the trafficking protocol. the article presents an analysis of how the dutch courts have interpreted two main elements of the definition the element of means specifically abuse of a position of vulnerability and the element purpose of exploitation . this article also elaborates upon the term transnational criminal law in order to improve our understanding of the unodc recently published a series of issue papers addressing what states parties to the protocol identified as problematic aspects of the international legal definition of trafficking in persons. see united nations office on drugs and crime abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons unodc vienna united nations office on drugs and crime the role of consent in the trafficking in persons protocol unodc vienna united nations office on drugs and crime the concept of exploitation in the trafficking in persons protocol unodc vienna . g tyldum dependence and human trafficking in the context of transnational marriage international migration vol. pp. . j chuang exploitation creep and the unmaking of human trafficking law american journal of international law vol. pp. . h shamir a labor paradigm for human trafficking ucla law review vol. pp. . unodc issue papers observe that the potential breadth and narrowness of the definition has raised several issues to which states have taken quite different positions . see for instance united nations office on drugs and crime the concept of exploitation in the trafficking in persons protocol unodc vienna p. . arato is of the opinion that ... national courts have a particular responsibility to supervise the proper interpretation of treaties because their judgments have a recursive relationship to the treaty being applied . and ... domestic interpretations can have a significant impact on the meaning of a treaty over time. they not only interpret and apply international treaties but further contribute to their meaning and affect their growth. j arato deference to the executive the us debate in global perspective in h p aust and g nolte eds the interpretation of international law by domestic courts uniformity diversity convergence oxford university press oxford p. . statute of the international court of justice accessible online via http www.icj cij.org documents p p chapter ii retrieved february . van der wilt makes this remark in an article on the influence of domestic courts on international criminal law. h van der wilt domestic courts contribution to the development of international criminal law some reflections israel law review vol. p. . doi . atr. relation between international definitions and national judges. finally the focus shifts to the actual application of the national definition by the dutch courts. the role of domestic courts in applying and interpreting transnational crimes within international law human trafficking is considered a transnational crime. this criminological term embraces offences whose inception prevention and or direct or indirect efforts involved more than one country . expanding on this boister introduced the concept of transnational criminal law or the indirect suppression by international law through domestic penal law of criminal activities that have actual or potential transboundary effects author s italics . both concepts are directly related. where the first elaborates on the transnational nature of the crimes the latter is more concerned with the specific action prescribed and subsequently the actor who has the task to take action. prominent in boister s definition of transnational criminal law is the dual responsibility for realising an effective approach of transnational crime for both international and national actors. on the one hand the outer parameters within which conduct must be made a criminal offence are established at the international level. national actors on the other hand have to take steps to actually criminalise the behaviour states and apply and interpret the definition in practice. accordingly when it comes to the realisation of criminalisation there is a degree of interdependence observable between transnational and national law. human trafficking s status as part of transnational criminal law is not the sole explanation for the domestic courts paramount role. no less important is the method by which the definition was established at the international level. a definition can be formulated in such a way as to leave little room for doubt about its scope or it can be worded in what could be described as open ended terms. the latter increases the chance that actors within states responsible for applying and interpreting the law will play a major role in determining the scope of application of the definition. that is the case with human trafficking. the drafting history confirms that in order to accommodate many parties with divergent interests aspects of the definition were deliberately left vague. accordingly the international definition of human trafficking leaves room for interpretation of its individual components. that is noteworthy in view of the high standards that should be met in terms of certainty and predictability in the law particularly in criminal law. however when little is known about a particular phenomenon at the time it is being criminalised and when there are strong priority reasons to secure consensus it is perhaps preferable not to make the law too rigid but to leave room for the courts to apply it in practice in specific cases. that was also the feeling in relation to human trafficking especially with respect to forms of exploitation outside the sex industry which many countries had not yet any experience addressing as a criminal phenomenon. in sum that human trafficking is part of transnational criminal law implies that states and domestic courts play a major role in the actual realisation of the human trafficking criminalisation. in this case the open definition presuming it is transposed without clarification into domestic law can be considered problematic in light of the principle of legal certainty but can also be conceived as an invitation to domestic courts to flesh out its precise meaning in their respective local contexts. the next section reviews how the dutch courts have approached that invitation. the human trafficking provision in the dutch criminal code and its interpretation by the supreme court a.conf. add. april https www.unodc.org documents congress previous congresses th congress aconf. . .add. interim report strengthening the rule of law.pdf retrieved july . for the history of this term see g mueller transnational crime definitions and concepts in p williams and d vlassis combating transnational crime concepts activities and responses frank cass publishers london portland p. . n boister transnational criminal law european journal of international law vol. p. . see for a more thorough treatise of this subject by the same author n boister an introduction to transnational criminal law oxford university press oxford . for an overview of the key issues at stake during the drafting process of the trafficking protocol see a gallagher the international law of human trafficking cambridge university press cambridge para . . . see also chuang p. . every norm however precisely formulated in fact leaves some room for interpretation. or as the european court of human rights succinctly expressed it in a landmark judgment however clearly drafted a legal provision may be in any system of law including criminal law there is an inevitable element of judicial interpretation. there will always be a need for elucidation of doubtful points and for adaptation to changing circumstances. ecthr november appl.no. c.n. v. uk para . regarding the meaning of the principle of legal certainty in criminal law see m faure m goodwin and f weber the regulator s dilemma caught between the need for flexibility the demands of foreseeability. reassessing the lex certa principle albany law journal of science technology vol. pp. . doi . atr. in the netherlands the main source of criminal law is the dutch criminal code but the scope of the human trafficking provision cannot properly be understood without taking into account decisions of the supreme court. human trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation already was an offence under dutch criminal law when the trafficking protocol was drafted. human trafficking is a criminal offence under article f of the dutch criminal code dcc . legislators decided to take the protocol definition almost verbatim thereby widening the range of human trafficking to other forms of exploitation and ensuring alignment with international law. the offence stipulated in article f paragraph under involves an action by certain means and with a specific intention the criminal intent the purpose of exploitation. in a series of judgments the supreme court has shed further light on how the individual components of this definition should be interpreted. this case law has concentrated on the interpretation of the means element in particular abuse of a position of vulnerability and the criminal intent element the purpose of exploitation . abuse of a position of vulnerability apov in the international definition of human trafficking abuse of a position of vulnerability apov is one of the means in the international definition of human trafficking and apart from its inclusion in the trafficking protocol it is not otherwise known to international law. according to the travaux pr paratoires to the protocol the term is to be understood as referring to any situation in which the person involved has no real or acceptable alternative but to submit to the abuse involved . essentially this requires that in each individual case it has to be established whether there was a position of vulnerability and if so whether the suspect intentionally abused that position to secure the act element of the offence. to prove this therefore it is necessary to consider the situation of both the victim and the suspect. neither the trafficking protocol nor the various guidance material available elaborate on these requirements. an issue paper on this subject published by the unodc in which included the results of a survey of law and practice in countries confirmed wide variation between states with regard to how this means is understood and applied. the main area of discussion concerned the question of what exactly constitutes a position of vulnerability and the differences in the evidentiary requirements for establishing abuse of that vulnerability. unquestionably the term is very open ended. should a person s precarious financial situation constitute a position of vulnerability for example is a person s status as an illegal immigrant in itself sufficient to presume the existence of a position of vulnerability and what kind of intentional involvement is required to prove the defendant s abuse of an established vulnerability the issue paper provides important insight into these questions and includes a guidance note for practitioners that sets out key issues for consideration. abuse of a position of vulnerability in the dcc and case law in the netherlands in dutch case law abuse of a position of vulnerability apov plays a significant role. in a quantitative study into dutch cases conducted in by the office of the dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children it appeared that in almost all cases apov was included in the indictment. moreover in all cases of trafficking for labour exploitation that led to a conviction apov was established. apov truly is in the wording of the unodc issue paper on this subject an inherent feature of most if not all trafficking cases . not surprisingly it did not take long for the supreme court to render its first decision on the interpretation of this means of trafficking. in the court delivered a landmark judgment which set out the requirements that have to be met to prove the abuse element the diamond city case . furthermore the legislative history and supreme court judgments from before when the international definition was incorporated into the dutch criminal code are still relevant since one of the means specified in the already existing dutch definition of human trafficking is abuse of the position of dominance arising from the factual relationships . according to the supreme court this concept in this regard the dutch legal scholar rozemond speaks about the method of substantive criminal law by which he means that the exact scope of the substantive criminal law can only be found when the criminal provision in the code and the supreme court s judgments are taken together. k rozemond de methode van het materi le strafrecht ars aequi libri nijmegen in dutch only . this section draws on the relevant issue paper produced by the united nations on this subject united nations office on drugs and crime abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons unodc vienna . ibid. p. . united nations office on drugs and crime travaux pr paratoires of the negotiations for the elaboration of the united nations convention against transnational organized crime and the protocols thereto p. . dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings trafficking in human beings. case law in trafficking in human beings . an analysis bnrm the hague para . . . united nations office on drugs and crime abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons unodc vienna p. . diamond city case. this decision is fully translated into english and available through the online unodc case law database. retrieved july https www.unodc.org res cld case law nld diamond city html diamond english version.pdf doi . atr. overlaps with that of apov. many of the examples discussed by legislators in when the national definition of human trafficking was being debated in parliament would therefore also have been included under the term abuse of a position of vulnerability today. because the intention of the legislation was to provide extensive protection against every form of force or compulsion in the sex industry legislators opted for a relatively broad approach stipulating that the means abuse of the position of dominance arising from the factual relationships is sufficiently proven when the prostitute is in a situation or comes into a situation that is other than the circumstances accepted by an assertive prostitute in the netherlands . examples provided included indebtedness drug addiction not possessing documentation and lack of personal financial resources. in its judgment the supreme court also ruled that a person s illegal status places that person in a vulnerable position. a vulnerable position alone however is not enough to prove abuse of a position of vulnerability. in the aforementioned judgment of the supreme court elaborated on the criteria that have to be met to establish such abuse. the judgment was rendered in a trafficking for labour exploitation case involving chinese irregular immigrants who had literally begged the owner of a chinese restaurant for work. before looking at the criteria given by the supreme court it is useful to focus at the facts. the appeal court in the underlying case established inter alia the following facts the irregular chinese immigrants involved as victim witnesses had decided to come to the netherlands of their own accord in order to earn money. they applied for work to the restaurant owner a number also asked for meals and lodging and a number asked solely for meals and lodging. the last group then worked in exchange for meals and lodging without receiving any further remuneration. none had any monetary debts or other obligations towards the restaurant owners. all were free to depart at any time they wished. a number of them had already worked in the netherlands at one or more other locations. the legal question that arose in this case was whether it could be said under these circumstances that the restaurant owner abused the position of vulnerability of the irregular migrants. in its consideration of the judgment of the court of first instance the appeal court answered this question in the negative and considered that in view of the facts mentioned above it is not possible to state that the accused and or one or more others had taken the initiative or acted actively towards the aforementioned chinese for example by approaching them or persuading them to work in the restaurant. rather they responded to requests and in a number of instances pleas from the chinese. in view of these circumstances it is not possible to find proved that the accused and or one or more others purposefully abused a position of dominance arising from the factual relationships with or the weaker vulnerable position of the chinese in accommodating or harbouring them. what the appeal court in this case did was interpret the means of apov in such a way that it became an evidentiary requirement to determine whether an accused purposefully abused the vulnerable position for instance by taking the initiative and playing an active role in the recruitment process of victims. the supreme court however did not follow the judgment. in contrast it ruled that ... adequate proof of abuse has been submitted when it is established that the perpetrator must have been aware of the relevant factual circumstances of the person concerned from which the position of dominance arose or may be presumed to have arisen in the sense that these circumstances gave cause to the perpetrator s conditional intent. the same is applicable to situations in which the victim is in a vulnerable position as referred to in the provision. it should be noted that in addition to this requirement of intent another more stringent requirement of intent is applicable to the exploitation namely the purpose of exploitation. the judgment of the supreme court takes a different approach when establishing the evidentiary requirements to prove the abuse element in the context of apov. where the appeal court explicitly focusses on the degree of dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings trafficking in human beings. case law in trafficking in human beings . an analysis bnrm the hague para . . . ibid. p. . the authors purposely do not refer to the original documents since these are only available in dutch. the case law report of the dutch rapporteur however consists of an in depth analysis of the history of the dutch human trafficking legislation in english. diamond city para . . . diamond city para . . . ibid. doi . atr. initiative of the accused and his active role in the process of recruitment the supreme court determined that a lower threshold was required. there is according to the court already a presumption of abuse at such time as the offender is aware of the factual circumstances that create the vulnerable position. to put it another way the conscious use of a position of vulnerability itself constitutes the abuse one can call this the use abuse doctrine . this decision confirms that the scope of this means is actually in the specific circumstances of that case and potentially in relation to different circumstances very wide. in this instance the accusation being made against the suspect is that he acted for example by employing people in a vulnerable position despite being aware of their vulnerability. to prove this it does not have to be established that he also purposefully intended to abuse the position of those individuals in that situation. this approach has been criticised nationally and internationally. some authors are of the opinion that this interpretation contributes to an expansion of the definition rendering it capable of including within its scope conduct that has little to do with the concept of trafficking. the unodc issue paper on apov states that ... the low standard set in some countries whereby perpetrators are not required to have taken any initiative in order for the element to be proven differentiates apov from other means all of which appear to require some level of action or initiative by on behalf of the alleged perpetrator . however international law does not prevent states to use a broader interpretation of the definition. and although the term abuse undeniably points in the direction of a perpetrator acting deliberately the nature of the intent is not further elaborated upon in international law. thus the fact that the dutch supreme court applies one of the lower forms of criminal intent the conditional intent fulfils the intent requisite. finally to establish human trafficking also requires proof of other elements. as shown below the element purpose of exploitation and its interpretation by the supreme court prevents the human trafficking definition from becoming overly inclusive. the mens rea element purpose of exploitation in the definition of human trafficking exploitation is primarily the purpose for which the actions are undertaken. to cite gallagher the purpose of exploitation constitutes the mens rea element of the international definition of human trafficking and therefore rests on intention what was the suspect s intention while performing the acts and utilising the means it is beyond the scope of this article to discuss at length the relevance of intention in criminal law. in discussing purpose of exploitation the main question is how to establish that a person specifically intended to exploit another person. to do that it is necessary to form a judgment of what constitutes exploitation and formulate requirements regarding the degree to which the suspect s intentions can be ascertained. suspects generally remain silent about their intentions and in those cases the court is compelled to establish intent on the basis of available evidence. the purpose of exploitation in the case law of the dutch supreme court in the aforementioned judgment of the supreme court also ruled on how the purpose of exploitation can be established. before discussing its findings it is important to note that purpose as one of the forms of intent already existed in dutch criminal law. according to the standard formula adopted by the supreme court a suspect can be said to have acted with a specific purpose if he must have realised that his actions would lead or have led to the other person being exploited and that consequently this was what the suspect wished. the purpose requirement therefore calls for more than dolus eventualis the suspect must not simply have been aware of the possibility of a particular consequence but must also have specifically desired that consequence dolus specialis. to examine whether this requirement is met the court must have an idea of what constitutes exploitation since only then can it address the question of whether the evidence that was furnished has shown to have been the suspect s purpose. subsection of the relevant dutch law contains a non exhaustive list of forms of exploitation which follows more or less the wording of article a second part of the trafficking protocol. the logical course united nations office on drugs and crime abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons unodc vienna p. . see also the critical comment about this judgment by legal scholar buruma. dutch supreme court october ecli nl hr bi nj with comment by y buruma in dutch only . united nations office on drugs and crime abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons unodc vienna p. . gallagher p. . the standard evidential criterion for the purpose element is formulated in dutch supreme court april ecli nl hr zd . see for more on the modes of intention distinguished in criminal law t weigend subjective elements of criminal liability in m d dubber and t h rnle the oxford handbook of criminal law oxford university press oxford chapter . the list was recently supplemented with forced begging and exploitation in criminal activities with the implementation of the eu human trafficking directive. directive eu of the european parliament and of the council on preventing and combating trafficking in doi . atr. to take in interpreting exploitation would be to follow the various forms of exploitation listed in the law and the definitions of them that already exist at the international level or indeed in national law itself. however the supreme court took a different path and chose instead to formulate a number of factors that should apply in assessing every form of exploitation regardless of the precise form of exploitation. relevant factors in that context the supreme court found include the nature and duration of the work the limitations it imposes on the individual concerned and the economic advantage accruing to the employer. furthermore the frame of reference for weighing these and other relevant factors should be the prevailing social standards in the netherlands. it is not necessary for all of the factors to apply. ultimately the various factors have to be weighed against each other some will weigh more heavily than others in some cases while different factors will weigh more heavily in others. it is possible for example that in a particular situation the employer enjoys a major financial advantage but imposes relatively few limitations on the victim. this perspective can be particularly important in cases where victims do not self identify as having been exploited. in other cases it might not be the profit made that stands out but rather the number of hours worked the nature of the work or the limitations that the situation imposed on the employee. in the case of the chinese immigrants the supreme court qualified the decision by the appeal court that the purpose of exploitation could not be established as incomprehensible in view of the facts and the criteria mentioned above. in a judgment the supreme court added another dimension to these criteria when it ruled that the outcome of this weighing of perspectives can be different when the victim is a minor. the court s meaning and the implications of this aspect of the judgement are both unclear but it must be assumed that it calls on lower courts to include in their weighting the fact that the victim in the case is a minor. the factors enunciated by the supreme court provide a clear framework that reflects the complexity of the element purpose of exploitation and the variety of forms that exploitation can take and contexts in which it can occur. in practice this framework serves as an important benchmark which is decisive for establishing the parameters of the offence. conclusion this article shows the discretion that domestic courts enjoy in clarifying the definition of human trafficking and thereby provides insight into the interaction between international and national law in cases involving transnational criminal law as is the case in the field of human trafficking . this interaction is one of mutual dependence. on the one hand national courts are bound to render judgment within the boundaries of the international parameters in this case the elements of the international definition of human trafficking as integrated into national law. at the same time we have seen that the use of open norms in that definition invariably requires domestic courts to engage in interpretation. in that context relevant developments in the netherlands have been the broad interpretation of apov and the enduring influence of national legislative history around this concept and the decision to interpret purpose of exploitation without making a distinction between the different forms of exploitation. the fact of such interpretation is not surprising. as the unodc studies confirmed the international legal definition of trafficking is interpreted in significantly different ways and only assumes concrete form in the individual states. the space left for domestic courts to give further meaning to the definition of human trafficking raises the question of how unavoidable differences in interpretations between different states should be understood. the answer depends on the perspective from which the interaction between international and national law is assessed. some tend to opt for a more sovereigntist perspective arguing that criminal law is primarily the province of democratically legitimated national legislators. on that basis the room that is left to the courts to interpret the definition of human trafficking can be regarded as positive. in contrast for adherents of a more uniform application human beings and protecting its victims and replacing council framework decision jbz april . the directive was published in the official journal of the eu oj l on april . for instance the existing definition of forced or compulsory labour as laid down in the ilo forced labour convention ilo convention of june concerning forced or compulsory labour . see for a recent analysis of other legal concepts surrounding the trafficking definition n siller modern slavery does international law distinguish between slavery enslavement and trafficking journal of international criminal justice vol. pp. . diamond city para . . . see also the advisory opinion of advocate general knigge in the diamond city case https www.unodc.org res cld case law nld diamond city html diamond english version.pdf retrieved july available in english . diamond city para . . . dutch supreme court november ecli nl hr not available in english . repeated in dutch supreme court april ecli nl hr . united nations office on drugs and crime abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons unodc vienna united nations office on drugs and crime the role of consent in the trafficking in persons protocol unodc vienna united nations office on drugs and crime the concept of exploitation in the trafficking in persons protocol unodc vienna . for more on this tendency see j ouwerkerk criminal justice beyond national sovereignty european journal of crime criminal law and criminal justice vol. pp. . doi . atr. of global definitions and norms the discretion granted to domestic courts defeats the original purpose of developing a universal understanding of human trafficking namely to harmonise national legal frameworks in order to facilitate more effective international cooperation. whatever viewpoint is taken domestic courts will continue to play a major role in the application and interpretation of national definitions derived from the international human trafficking definition. to cite van der wilt again domestic courts are able to refine interpret and therefore change the law and they contribute to the further development of international criminal law . as noted previously the international definition of human trafficking in the trafficking protocol still generates controversy and many authors and organisations have addressed the complex issues that arise with regard to the scope of the definition. remarkably less attention has been paid to the application and interpretation of national definitions. mindful of the prominent role of national judges this is a subject that needs more attention. this new stream in the discourse on the legal definition of human trafficking is more than welcome. luuk b esser works as a researcher at the bureau of the dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children and is also affiliated with leiden law school leiden university as a phd candidate. email l.b.esser nationaalrapporteur.nl corinne e dettmeijer vermeulen is the dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children and has worked as a judge and public prosecutor. email c.e.dettmeijer vermeulen nationaalrapporteur.nl h van der wilt domestic courts contribution to the development of international criminal law some reflections israel law review vol. p. . 