 does legalised prostitution generate more human trafficking there is growing concern about the effects of prostitution policy on the overall scale of human trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation. however it is not known how many women are forced to work in the prostitution sector in relation to the number who do so voluntarily. in amsterdam alone an estimated prostitutes work in the sex industry. according to the national threat assessment on organised crime an estimated people in the netherlands were working in prostitution in . while a similar estimate has been repeatedly cited it seems to come from a study carried out in before the abolition of the ban on brothels. at the moment there are no reliable figures available for the total number of prostitutes in the netherlands. evidently some prostitutes are exploited but because of the hidden nature of both human trafficking and prostitution it is difficult to say how large this proportion is. in that context the national threat assessment said we do find that the figure of victims in is a minimum because of a limited willingness among victims to report offences. victims are afraid that their family will be subjected to violence if they report to the police. it is not known how much higher the actual number of victims is because of the centre de recherches internationales et de documentation sur l exploitation sexuelle crides de la fondation scelles see also beke p. . in the evaluation of the lifting of the ban on brothels by the ministry of security and justice s research and documentation centre wodc in this estimate was mentioned but with the proviso that the precise composition of the total population of prostitutes was not known since part of the population of prostitutes is fairly invisible wodc p. soa aids also refers to prostitutes in the netherlands frequently asked questions soa aids n.d. www.prostitutie.nl index.php id c consulted on june see also centre de recherches internationales et de documentation sur l exploitation sexuelle crides de la fondation scelles . mens van der helm . because of the hidden character of prostitution like human trafficking it is also difficult to estimate the total number of prostitutes. this is a reference to the persons who according to comensha s records were sexually exploited in see also nrm f table b . . . there probably is a significant dark number with respect to the number of victims. at the same time there are possibly a number of false positives in comensha s records meaning that a case registered as human trafficking is in reality not since possible victims are reported to comensha and there is no formal assessment see also nrm f p. . as already mentioned the human trafficking that is registered also depends on a number of factors that are not necessarily related to the total scale of human trafficking see nrm f pp. . significant disparity in the views about the size of the dark number in relation to victims of human trafficking. the total scale of human trafficking the total scale of human trafficking is the aggregate of what is visible and invisible. the ideal situation would be for every instance of human trafficking to be known in which case there would be no dark number the number of human trafficking situations that are not known to any agency the invisible human trafficking . however because of the hidden nature of human trafficking in reality there will always be a dark number which can only be estimated. the problem however is not that there are no estimates but that the estimates that have been made are inaccurate or unreliable. the report trafficking in human beings. visible and invisible contained a critical analysis of three estimates that have been made of the total number of victims with the aim of prompting further discussion of national and international estimates and promoting efforts to improve methods for making a reasonably reliable estimate on which consensus could be reached. figures are used to reinforce viewpoints and can form the basis for intensive policy measures. however positions are sometimes taken on the basis of unverifiable unreliable or inaccurate data. for example estimates are sometimes taken from earlier studies to demonstrate the alarming scale of prostitution or human trafficking without any enquiry into how the original researchers arrived at their estimates. but bad data are worse than no data . as regards the use of statistics for the development of evidence based policy making it is essential to be certain of the reliability and validity of the data in order to avoid reaching evidence thin conclusions. nationaal dreigingsbeeld georganiseerde criminaliteit national threat assessment on organised crime pp. . the total scale of human trafficking is equal to the human trafficking that is registered the known human trafficking minus the false positives the human trafficking that is registered as such but in reality is not plus the dark number the unregistered unknown human trafficking including the false negatives the human trafficking that is known visible but has not yet been recognised as such . in short it is the aggregate of the visible human trafficking and the invisible human trafficking . nrm f p. . the visible component of human trafficking the registered human trafficking depends to a large extent on developments related to factors such as the attention devoted to human trafficking in society the priorities that are set and the capacity that is made available within investigative agencies and the public prosecution service pps the more you look the more you will find principle the method of registration by the relevant agencies and changes in legislation see also nrm f pp. . for the specific reservations regarding the estimates see nrm f . . . . . a national estimate of victims of sexual exploitation in the crime projection analysis cba a national estimate of victims of other forms of exploitation by fairwork and an international estimate of forced labour by the ilo see also nrm f chapter . the national rapporteur has made the following recommendation for improvement the government should endeavour to produce adequate estimates of the scale of human trafficking. in addition to complete and reliable data collection this calls for statistical expertise. nrm f recommendation . see nrm f . . see also weitzer pp. . weitzer p. . see also weitzer . investigations of the effects of legalised prostitution the effect of legalised prostitution in preventing cross border human trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation has been investigated in a number of academic articles. two recent examples are does legalised prostitution increase human trafficking by seo young cho axel dreher and eric neumayer and the law and economics of international sex slavery prostitution laws and trafficking for sexual exploitation by niklas jakobsson and andreas kotsadam . the authors of both articles reach the same conclusion there are more human trafficking situations in countries where prostitution has been legalised. this section describes how such academic studies are still in their infancy because the data and the research methods are not yet complete and are insufficiently reliable to support the conclusions drawn or to provide a basis for policy. first and foremost the articles are based on cross sectional quantitative research which cannot be used to draw the conclusion that the legalisation of prostitution results in more human trafficking. cho dreher and neumayer used the report global patterns by the united nations office on drugs and crime unodc to investigate the degree of correlation between prostitution legislation in a particular country and the reported stream of human trafficking to that country. to verify whether the authors conclusions also held true for other data sets in addition to the data from the unodc report jakobsson and kotsadam also used data from globalization and the illicit market for human trafficking an empirical analysis of supply and demand a report produced by the international labour organization ilo . that report referred to a data set that the ilo compiled for its first estimate in which was based on a large number of reports containing information about human trafficking in the period . because cross sectional research provides no indication of the impact of changes in prostitution legislation in a particular period on the total scale of human trafficking a second method was adopted. cho dreher and neumayer carried out three case studies on the situation in sweden denmark and germany countries in which prostitution legislation was amended during the period covered by their study . to assess the effect of changes in prostitution legislation they used existing estimates of the total number of victims. jakobsson and kotsadam also stated that there were no reliable longitudinal data for human trafficking. to support the argument that there is a causal relationship between prostitution legislation and cho dreher neumayer . jakobsson kotsadam . cross sectional research is research that looks at a single moment in time in other words a snapshot. the opposite is longitudinal research where the study is conducted over a certain period in order to document the process. for longitudinal research however there must be a baseline measurement how much human trafficking was there before the policy change such baseline measurements are not always feasible for policy changes that were introduced several years earlier. unodc . there is now a more recent report on human trafficking by the unodc which takes into account some of the reservations discussed here see also nrm . . . the unodc report provides information about the human trafficking reported to and in countries unodc . the analysis by cho dreher and neumayer encompassed countries cho dreher neumayer . danailova trainor belser . this information yielded an ilo database that was used for an earlier report by the ilo which gave an estimate of the minimum scale of forced labour ilo minimum estimate of forced labour in the world see nrm f . for more information about the ilo s estimates in and in . cho dreher and neumayer p. . the estimates are based on different sources for each case study including an estimate mentioned by ekberg nicola et al. . human trafficking they carried out two case studies for sweden and norway countries where buying sex was made a criminal offence in and respectively. although the authors of both articles employed a refined method for the cross sectional study there are a number of reservations to be expressed about their conclusions relating mainly to the quantity and quality of the available data. the most important reservation is that there was very little analysis of the proportion of visible victims of human trafficking in relation to the proportion that is invisible. the authors relied on data concerning human trafficking situations that were known using the datasets of the unodc and ilo which greatly depend on the human trafficking that has been registered in individual countries. what is visible can be influenced by factors such as the attention devoted to human trafficking in society the priorities that are set and the capacity that is made available within for example the investigative services. accordingly the surveys in the unodc report are based among other things on the number of times that a country is mentioned in various sources as the country of destination of victims. the prominence given to a country in the report is to a large extent determined by the attention devoted to human trafficking in that country. it is also conceivable that legalisation of prostitution has an impact in making human trafficking visible. invisible human trafficking can only be estimated but as already mentioned at the moment there are no reliable estimates of the total scale of human trafficking. jakobsson and kotsadam do refer but only briefly to the distinction between visible and invisible prostitution. they reportedly found no evidence that hidden prostitution had increased in sweden and norway but added that they could not rule out the possibility that it was so deeply hidden that it had not been identified by any agency at all investigative or otherwise. a second reservation relates to the case studies that the researchers conducted. two and three case studies are too few to allow for judgements at an international level about the effect of specific prostitution policies. more reliable data are needed from a larger number of case studies. furthermore making accurate and reliable comparisons of the total number of victims before and after amendment of prostitution legislation in a particular country seems impossible in these countries because there is little or no information available about the human trafficking registered before the changes in the policy towards prostitution were made never mind the total number of victims of human trafficking registered and unregistered . for this the researchers used information from other published sources. unodc . see also gao nrm pp. . in the fifth report the national rapporteur said the following about the unodc report in the overviews in the unodc report are based on the number of times a particular country is mentioned as a country of origin transit or destination for victims in a range of sources. this means that the part played by a country in the report is determined to a significant extent by the amount of attention paid to trafficking in human beings in that country. ... many countries voiced fierce criticism of a draft version of the report at the end of . apart from the points mentioned above the national rapporteur also pointed out the geographical bias it is for example highly incredible that not a single african country is classified as very high among destination countries as well as problems of methodology such as the absence of information concerning the validity and reliability of the base material nrm pp. see nrm . . for more information about the more recent report by unodc . see nrm f chapter . jakobsson kotsadam p. . conclusion it is not yet possible to give an answer on the basis of statistics to the question of the extent to which legalisation of prostitution leads to more human trafficking. the answer would require an analysis of the human trafficking that is visible compared with the invisible human trafficking and this calls for the collection of more reliable data both quantitative and qualitative concerning visible and invisible human trafficking. research into the effect of the legalisation of prostitution is also complicated by the fact that the total scale of human trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation is not solely dependent on policies towards prostitution. such research would also have to encompass all other push and pull factors that could have an impact on the prevalence of human trafficking in a particular country and which can differ greatly from one country to another. nevertheless one component of an effective approach to combating human trafficking is to make human trafficking visible. first and foremost that calls for a clearer picture of the nature and scale of the prostitution sector. the researchers themselves mention the limitations of their article the problem here lies in the clandestine nature of both the prostitution and trafficking markets making it difficult perhaps impossible to find hard evidence establishing this relationship cho dreher neumayer p. . although the data do not allow us to infer robust causal inference the results suggest that criminalizing procuring or going further and criminalizing buying and or selling sex may reduce the amount of trafficking to a country. ... it should be noted once again that the data quality on international human trafficking is far from perfect and we strongly recommend more data collection. jakobsson kotsadam abstract . the national rapporteur has already made a recommendation on how to produce adequate estimates nrm f recommendation . see nrm f chapter and chapter to tackle human trafficking effectively it must be made visible. human trafficking that is hidden must be revealed and once revealed it must be better registered. literature beke a. van wijk a. nieuwenhuis d. van tuyn t. van ham j. kuppens h. ferwerda kwetsbaar beroep. een onderzoek naar de prostitutiebranche in amsterdam amsterdam bureau beke . cho dreher neumayer s. cho a. dreher e. neumayer does legalized prostitution increase human trafficking world development pp. . danailova trainor belser g. danailova trainor p. belser globalization and the illicit market for human trafficking an empirical analysis of supply and demand. international labour office working paper . di nicola orfano cauduro conci di nicola i. orfano a. cauduro n. conci study on national legislation on prostitution and the trafficking in women and children european parliament transcrime joint research centre on transnational crime http ec.europa.eu anti trafficking download.action jsessionid hzl scqdrqvh q yhvdt f zpctz jbmpwztn vtt bnqqtdv nodepath feu policy fstudy on national legislation and prostitution en.pdf filename study on national legislation and prostitution en.pdf filetype pdf. ekberg g. ekberg the swedish law that prohibits the purchase of sexual services violence against women pp. . gao united states government accountability office human trafficking better data strategy and reporting needed to enhance u.s. anti trafficking efforts abroad gao washington d.c. http www.gao.gov new.items d .pdf. ilo international labour organization global estimate of forced labour. executive summary geneva ilo . jakobsson en kotsadam n. jakobsson a. kotsadam the law and economics of international sex slavery prostitution laws and trafficking for sexual exploitation european journal of law and economics pp. . http ec.europa.eu anti trafficking download.action nrm national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings fifth report of the dutch national rapporteur the hague bureau of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings . nrm f national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings trafficking in human beings visible and invisible. a quantitative report the hague bureau of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings . nrm national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings ninth report of the dutch national rapporteur the hague bureau of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings to be published in english . nationaal dreigingsbeeld georganiseerde criminaliteit korps landelijke politiediensten nationaal dreigingsbeeld . georganiseerde criminaliteit. zoetermeer dienst ipol . unodc united nations office for drug control and crime trafficking in persons. global patterns vienna unodc . van mens van der helm l. van mens t. van der helm mobiliteit in de nederlandse prostitutie. een inventarisatie. uitgevoerd in het kader van europap . utrecht http www.prostitutie.nl fileadmin nl . studie . documenten . b gezondheidszorg pdf student.doc.gzhz .pdf. weitzer r. weitzer sex trafficking and the sex industry the need for evidence based theory and legislation the journal of criminal law and criminology pp. . wodc a.l. daalder prostitutie in nederland na opheffing van het bordeelverbod the hague ministry of security and justice s research and documentation centre boom juridische uitgevers . 