












































 

Speech by Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen, 

Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 

and Sexual Violence against Children 

On the occasion of the Third International Conference on Law Enforcement and 

Public Health Officials,  

1 October 2016, Amsterdam 

-may diverge from the spoken tekst- 

 

Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. It is an honour to be in the company of 

such remarkable people and I would like to thank the organization for inviting 

me to speak today.   

A month ago, the tiniest column in a newspaper caught my attention. The 

column was almost drowned out by the other problems in the world, yet its 

content intrigued me. The Amsterdam Police Department has become 

increasingly confronted with what the national police corps have come to call 

‘confused people’. This term refers to the group of confused people found 

walking out on the streets and in need of help – psychiatric patients, the 

homeless, and outcasts. It was not this fact that drew my attention to the article, 

but the Amsterdam Chief of Police’s response to the matter. He believed that it 

is not the job of the police to provide help to these people, but to solely ‘catch 

bad guys’.      

 

Is that really the case? Do the police exist solely to catch bad guys? To ask this 

question in the current company seems almost redundant. To put it mildly, the 

fact that this statement was made in the present time is, in my opinion, 

remarkable. The Dutch Police Act states: the police has the role to practically 

enforce the law and the role to provide help to those who may need it. I believe 

this last role is of crucial importance, especially in times like these when crimes 



often leave victims seriously traumatized.  

 

Human trafficking is such a crime. As the National Rapporteur on Trafficking 

in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children I report on the scale 

and nature of these topics and advise the government on the effectiveness of 

policies. I would like to discuss one specific topic with you today, precisely 

because it is so closely related to the importance of a broad police role.  

That topic is the criminal exploitation of children. Children can be regarded as 

inherently vulnerable to human trafficking. In a recent report, the European 

Commission identified four different clusters of vulnerability in order to get a 

clearer understanding of the factors that make children vulnerable to human 

trafficking.  

First, individual vulnerability which derives from factors connected with the 

child’s personal situation and history. Impaired cognitive, for example, 

increases the likelihood of a child becoming a victim of human trafficking.  

Familial vulnerability, second, stems from factors related to the family 

situation, such as a situation of family breakdown or growing up within a 

dysfunctional family.  

Third, Social-economic vulnerability which evolves from membership of a 

marginalized population group. Low socio-economic status and a lack of 

options among marginalized communities, for example, increases the 

vulnerability of children towards trafficking.  

Structural vulnerability, finally, is the absence of a government that is 

adequately equipped to identify vulnerability and to provide protection of 

children against human trafficking.  

We have to take these different forms of vulnerability into account when 

dealing with children in the criminal justice system. Sometimes protection is 

more important than prosecution. I will clarify this point of view.   

Criminal exploitation is a form of human trafficking that concerns cases where 

human beings are forced to commit criminal offences by others. The criminal 



offences that one can commit for someone else are countless, though in The 

Netherlands we mostly see cases where children are pushed into committing 

theft. More often than not parents or other family members are involved.  

 

Something interesting happens during criminal exploitation: the victim also 

becomes the perpetrator. This dualism, when people enter the criminal justice 

system as both the victim and the accused, leads to a difficult question: should 

these victims, who are often children, be prosecuted? Not only is this a difficult 

question, but also one to which judicial frameworks often lack an answer. 

This prosecutorial question occurs in the context of discretionary powers, and 

the law has no answer to it. Even though a non-punishment principle has been 

accepted on a European level, it does not provide a definitive answer to 

individual cases. In other words: the answer depends on the creativity of the 

professionals that are confronted with this problem. It is the street level 

bureaucrat’s turn.   

The question of how to deal with this form of dualism is also pressing to the 

police, because the fate of a child is ultimately decided during the investigation. 

There are many police officers in The Netherlands who struggle with the 

question of how to deal with these children. I previously mentioned that parents 

or family members are frequently involved in the exploitation, which points to 

complex and problematic family dynamics. The main focus of police officers 

confronted with this situation is often that the child should be helped as much as 

possible. Criminal law, as we know, contributes little to that. However, 

wouldn’t leaving the children unpunished precisely give the parents or other 

family members a carte blanche? 

Once more, creative solutions are necessary and health care is indispensable. 

During a recent investigation on a large criminal exploitation network in The 

Netherlands health care officials were involved in the investigation from the 

beginning. The main objective was not to punish the children, but rather the 

parents or family. A specialized form of health care was provided to the 

children, where the police and health care providers were constantly interacting 



with one another.  

This is, however, not easy. The interests of the police and health care officials 

often differ. The goal of catching bad guys inherently makes the collection of 

information part of every investigation. To put it bluntly, children who have just 

entered the assistance program are ‘sources of information’ to the police.  

And what about health care providers? In the interest of children it is important 

to give them space and not include them as a witness in an investigation, 

especially in the beginning. But of course, the police cannot afford to take all 

the time in the world, especially when the care does not take place in a closed 

setting.  

 

Ultimately, it is about finding a balance. That sounds cliché, but the example I 

gave you illustrates this. When one asks whether a child must be prosecuted or 

punished for criminal offences that have been committed in a human trafficking 

context, the answer depends on the discretionary freedoms of bureaucrats and 

their use of them. We must be sensible for their vulnerabilities. It is not the law 

that guides, but practice and thus the professionals.  

When one asks what type of care a child must receive idem dito: there is no 

established practice. Obviously there are structures to fall back on, but those are 

usually too broad to completely face the challenges that up and coming 

phenomena present. And in the aforementioned example, I have assumed that 

the authorities even recognized the criminal exploitation. In real life, there is 

often a lack of recognition. The awareness of this form of exploitation must be 

greater in the judicial chain. Otherwise, the victim remains only a perpetrator. 

 

Back to what the Amsterdam Police Chief said a month ago. Of course I 

understand the context in which the statement was made: in turbulent times like 

these, policy logic is at a crossroads between capacity and priority. You play the 



cards you’re dealt. But at the same time, the case of criminal exploitation 

demonstrates that the statement not only indicates a limited idea of the police 

role, but also that the statement is counterfactual: the reality and the challenges 

of today show that the police’s role concerns and must concern much more than 

merely ‘catching bad guys’. The police role concerns both the enforcement of 

the law as well as the provision of help to those who may need it.  

Thank you for your attention.  


