











































1/6 
 

Speech by Corinne Dettmeijer, 

Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 

and Sexual Violence against Children 

 

On the occasion of the panel Missing Children: Disappearances, Abductions & 

Exploitation. Global Analysis for Post-2015.  

18 March 2016, New York 

 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, 

 

First of all I would like to express my thanks to the organisation for allowing me 

to speak to you today about the important subject of missing children. It is a 

subject that I am confronted with all too often in my work as the Dutch 

Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against 

Children.  

 

In the Netherlands for instance in 2014 a girl aged 16 went missing. Her family 

was extremely concerned. The police launched a search after a private detective 

gave them information about the possible whereabouts of the girl.  It still took 

some time before she  was found in a hotel. The police took action, stormed the 

hotel room and found a man with his trousers round his ankles, the girl on the 

bed and the pimp hiding in the bathroom. It later emerged from the police 

investigation that potential clients had phoned 250 times, that the girl had 

received more than 80 clients in a fortnight and that the money had gone to the 

21 year old human trafficker. 

 

This is what I want to talk about today, about girls and boys who go missing 

because they are abducted, misled or abused by human traffickers. The problem 

arises more often than one might think. If you look at the 2015 figures from the 

National Center of Missing and Exploited Children, one in five of the reported 

children gone missing concern children  who are victims from sexual 

exploitation. Human traffickers who have removed the child from parental 

supervision are prepared to cause injury to a child’s sexual, psychological and 



2/6 
 

physical integrity, to take away their youth and deploy them as tools purely for 

financial gain.  

 

The problem extends to girls and boys, respects no frontiers and affects children 

of all ages. For instance, Europe is being confronted 

 with Nigerian girls and women who have gone missing and who are being 

sexually exploited under the coercion of a voodoo spell,  

 with Vietnamese children who run away from reception centres and are 

subsequently forced to work as ‘gardeners’ within houses to produce 

cannabis, and  

 with Roma children who are bought by gangs with the aim of having them 

to steal and beg.  

 

These are just a few examples that demonstrate how widespread the problem of 

human trafficking in combination with missing children really is.  

 

The question that must arise in everyone’s thoughts as soon as a child disappears 

is:  

 

‘What are they running from, where are they running to and who is making them 

run’?  

 

The actual fact of them being missing can equally well be a symptom that points 

to the real problem: Human trafficking. The exploitation of children.  

 

To prevent children going missing as much as possible the underlying problem 

has to be addressed. There are three steps needed: 

 

 Step one: Prevent and anticipate children going missing 

 Step two: Find the children as soon as possible.  

 Step three: Prevent children going missing again 

 

It sounds logical and simple, doesn’t it? Even so the first and the third steps are 

often disregarded while it is precisely here that a distinction has to be made. It is 

only then that the child is still in sight, which gives the opportunity for concrete 

measures.  

 



3/6 
 

Step 1 

Preventing children going missing. The first step. Most children run away from 

youth care and foster care institutions. Figures in the United States show that 

three-quarters of the children who are possible victims of human trafficking and 

who have been reported missing disappear from youth and foster care. In the 

Netherlands approximately ninety children annually disappear from youth care 

institutions and are seriously suspected of being victims of a human trafficker. 

Half of them disappear for a long time. That is almost one child a week.  

 

To prevent this happening we must do everything we can to spot the signs 

beforehand. To train youth care workers and foster care staff to see the signs of 

human trafficking. They are the First Responders and those who work with this 

vulnerable group. The protection of the group of children who are captured or 

‘captivated’ by a human trafficker entirely depends on recognising the signs and 

acting upon them.  

 

If a child in youth care is spotted who could be a potential victim of human 

trafficking a possible disappearance must be anticipated immediately. The key 

lies in building up a relationship of trust and covering the risks. A feature of 

young victims is that they can completely come under the spell of a human 

trafficker. To break this spell a safe situation has to be created.  

 

It is the job of the social workers to make children realise that they have fallen 

into the hands of a trafficker and not in the hands of a loving friend offering the 

promise of a wonderful future. This is not always easy or successful. It is a well-

known fact that the victims of human trafficking and notably young girls who 

are in love with their human trafficker could run away several times before they 

actually realise what is happening. The same is true for Vietnamese and Roma 

children who fall prey to traffickers in the Netherlands. They do everything they 

can to disappear to their human trafficker. They lie, they threaten and use all 

kinds of tricks. These groups have often been brainwashed or they have been put 

under heavy pressure and threatened. This is why it is crucial that besides 

prevention other measures are taken as well to anticipate on these children 

disappearing. Therefore a risk and safety analysis must be made.  

 

Risk analysis serves to ascertain what protection the victim needs to prevent him 

or her disappearing and falling again into the hands of the trafficker. Here the 



4/6 
 

police play a crucial role. The police have the expertise for estimating the threat 

of human traffickers. To protect children in the Netherlands the most vulnerable 

girls are sometimes placed in secure youth care institutions under the authority 

of the courts and with the aim of protecting them against their traffickers. It is a 

drastic precaution but necessary if nothing else helps.  

 

Alongside the risk analysis, a safety analysis is also needed. An analysis with 

the aim of mapping the victim’s network. Who is that ‘friend’ for instance, who 

does she mix with and where does she stay? Ask about the use of social media, 

screen visitors and above all take a photograph that can be used in the event of 

any search. This information has to be stored in a central location and shared as 

much as possible with the police if the victim disappears. This is the information 

that can make all the difference between protection or exploitation.  

 

Step 2 

Step two is to find the under-age victim as fast as possible. To prevent various 

bodies waiting to see who will act first it is important to reach agreements on 

who will take the lead and in what instances, if a child disappears. A multi-

agency protocol. It must be clear beforehand what resources can be deployed by 

the various bodies. If these things are only thought about once a child has gone 

missing, it is too late. In emergency cases where there are clear signs that the 

victim has gone to a human trafficker time is the most crucial factor. In 

particular children who are being used for sexual exploitation are regularly 

transported from town to town to be exploited in the illegal circuit which 

seriously complicates the search. One must consequently start at once using the 

right means and methods.  

 

An appeal to the public is one of the possibilities. This encourages the public at 

large to keep an eye out for younger children. If need be the whole country can 

be transformed into a huge ‘gone missing’ poster. Advertising hoardings, 

highway signs, apps, text messages and email can be used to find the child. 

Targeted searches can carried out in certain regions or specific institutions can 

be activated. Even so we must scrupulously ascertain how opportune it is to 

deploy these methods. It depends very much on the urgency of the matter. My 

fear is that by being publicly labelled a victim of human trafficking the child 

may be stigmatised for life with all the ensuing consequences.  

 



5/6 
 

And then there are possibilities of using technological means to find children. In 

the United States, for research purposes, the database of missing children was 

linked to websites where people were offering paid sex. It turned out that several 

children who were missing could be found in this way. The technology, 

PhotoDNA, that can be used for this purpose, with Google and Microsoft 

leading the way, is becoming increasingly more adept at linking photos. Even if 

these photos are taken in different spaces and if the child for example has a 

different colour of hair and is wearing different clothes.  

 

Step 3 

The third and last step begins when the child has been found. Then we have to 

ask ourselves who should collect the child. A person close to the victim, the 

police or a social worker? To a large extent this depends on the situation in 

which the child is found.  

 

In the case of the girl being sexually exploited in a hotel I mentioned earlier, the 

situation determines that the police must take action. At the same time 

arrangements have to be made for the immediate care of the girl and the initial 

medical and psychological needs ascertained straight away. These steps are 

crucial for building up a relationship of trust with the victim with the aim of 

extricating the child from her human trafficker. If that tie is not broken 

protection is at risk of failing.  

 

Once the victim has returned to a safe situation, the time has come to ask what 

happened. From research follows that an interview of this kind does not always 

take place with unaccompanied children that were found again. The same 

applies to missing children in the Netherlands while in fact it is precisely these 

interviews that are indispensable in gathering investigative information and 

gaining insight as to why the victim disappeared in the first place. The interview 

also forms the basis for establishing the risk of a new chance of going missing.  

 

The crucial element in these interviews is to find out what power the human 

trafficker has over the child. Are family or friends being threatened? Is the child 

in love with the perpetrator? Or does the perpetrator possess sexually explicit 

material of the child? Has the child been made an accessory to a criminal 

offence by the human trafficker? 



6/6 
 

All very dreadful things but tried and tested methods that are deployed by 

human traffickers.  

 

In the Netherlands for instance a boy went missing who was forced by human 

traffickers to have sex with men and to film this. After the sex the victim had to 

blackmail the men into paying money by threatening to put the pictures on line. 

When the victim was found the boy was afraid to tell his story. He was afraid 

that he would be punished. This is why it is crucial to explain the non-

punishment principle to the victims. That there is the possibility that they will 

not be prosecuted or will be not given a sentence if they have been forced to 

commit a criminal offence by the human trafficker. This example demonstrates 

that chains need not be of iron but can also be created by fear and threats. 

Knowledge and trust can break these chains and free these children from their 

human traffickers.  

 

Closing words 

That brings me to my closing words. The protection of women and men and in 

particular our children against exploitation is one of the greatest challenges we 

are facing as a society. Children who go missing are additionally vulnerable to 

seeing their youth and the sense of their own worth being sacrificed to the 

inhuman impulses of a human trafficker. It is up to us to stop that from 

happening.  

It must be a fundamental right of every child to be protected from harm.   

 

I have made a first move in that direction by describing these three steps. I close 

my contribution with repeating the question that should be engraved in 

everyone’s mind whenever a child goes missing: 

 

‘What are they running from, where are they running to and who is making them 

run’? 

 

 


