



















































































































































  

   Pagina 1 van 5 

 
 
 

 

 
 

 

Speech by Corinne Dettmeijer, 

Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 

and Sexual Violence against Children 

On the occasion of the presentation of the report ‘Monitoring Target 

16.2 of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals’ 

28 September 2017, New York. 

 

The added value of knowing how many trafficking victims exist in one’s 

country and how it contributes enormously to evidence based policies 

Let me start by expressing my gratitude to UNODC. Our collaboration in this 

important research project has been enlightening. And of course I’d like to 

thank all of you for joining this meeting that was made possible by the 

UNODC 

As Kristiina Kangaspunta pointed out, it is crucial for countries to report on 

indicator 16.2.2 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG’s) (‘Number of 

victims of human trafficking per 100,000 population, by sex, age and form of 

exploitation’). This indicator contributes greatly to the fight against human 

trafficking on both a national and international level. My aim is to show you 

the ways in which knowing the number of trafficking victims in one’s 

country enables the development of evidence-based policies.  

But let me start by briefly explaining why we used the ‘multiple systems 

estimation (MSE)’-method for estimating the true number of trafficking 

victims in the Netherlands. Firstly, as you all know, human trafficking – just 

like most other crimes – contends with a ‘dark figure’: an unknown number 

of undetected victims. Secondly, numbers on detected victims tend to reflect 

the effort put into uncovering human trafficking, rather than the true volume 

of trafficking. Comparisons of the number of detected victims, across time or 

between countries for example, might therefore easily lead to fundamentally 

flawed conclusions. The most common method to gain insight into the hidden 

part of crime is through conducting victim surveys among the population. 

However, unlike most other types of crime (like burglary or street mugging), 

 



 
 
 

   Pagina 2 van 5 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

human trafficking tends to be statistically rare, and also more deeply ‘hidden’ 

in the population at large (concentrated in more hard to reach subpopulations, 

like undocumented migrants). This is true for most countries with a relatively 

high standard of living, like the Netherlands. Moreover, asking people about 

their personal experiences with exploitation – especially sexual exploitation – 

is very challenging, if not impossible, due to feelings of fear or shame among 

respondents. As a result, victim surveys on human trafficking are not 

available in countries like the Netherlands. And this is where the MSE-

method comes in. 

The basis of the MSE-method is the existence of multiple registrations of 

detected trafficking victims, between whom the overlap can be determined. 

MSE allows an estimation of the number of victims not appearing in any of 

the registrations, given the distribution of the detected victims over the 

different registrations. The basic idea is as follows:  

• When most victims are detected – or in other words, when the ‘dark 

figure’ is relatively small – quite a few victims will be detected by 

more than one identifying organization (for example by the police as 

well as by a service providing organization). This means that the 

overlap between registrations will be considerable. 

• When victims are poorly detected – or in other words, when the ‘dark 

figure’ is relatively large – the incidentally detected victims will 

usually be detected by only one identifying organization. This means 

that the overlap between registrations will be very small. 

It is important to note here that in case a country practically does not detect 

any victims, an MSE cannot be carried out. Similarly, an MSE cannot be 

carried out in a country where  victims are detected but  are not registered by 

different identifying organizations; or, if they are registered, but the different 

registrations are not compatible (the registrations lack identifying information 

that can determine the overlap).  



 
 
 

   Pagina 3 van 5 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

You might know of previous endeavors to estimate human trafficking by the 

predecessor of the MSE: the ‘capture-recapture’-method or previous 

iterations of MSE itself. I shall briefly explain how these attempts have 

contributed to the development of the present MSE, but also why the present 

MSE is, in my opinion, the first really indicative iteration.   

1) As opposed to the ‘capture-recapture’-method, the MSE-method is 

based on three or more registrations instead of only two. This 

means that, despite the increased complexity of calculations after 

more registrations, some of the severe conditions that are hard to 

fulfill in the case of human trafficking, are relaxed.   

2) In comparison to previous iterations, the present MSE is based on 

a much bigger dataset (almost 7,000) that includes data on 

detected victims in six consecutive years (2010-2015). This results 

in a much stronger basis, and therefore a much more robust 

estimation.  

3) As opposed to previous iterations, the present MSE includes four 

covariates with different inclusion probabilities: gender 

(female/male), age (minor/adult), nationality (Dutch/foreign) and 

form of exploitation (sexual/other). ‘Different inclusion 

probabilities’ means that certain groups of victims have other 

chances of being detected than other groups of victims. If this is 

the case, for example: when victims of sexual exploitation are 

more likely to be detected than victims of other forms of 

exploitation, separate estimations should be made for each of 

these different groups of victims.  

Additionally, the different estimations of the different subpopulations of 

trafficking victims, based on the four covariates, serve important policy 

purposes. The following results will clearly illustrate that.  

The present MSE was carried out on the basis of almost 7,000 detected 

victims in the Netherlands, who were included in five different registrations 



 
 
 

   Pagina 4 van 5 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

(police, Inspectorate SZW, regional coordinators, residential treatment 

centers and shelters and others), in a period of six consecutive years (2010-

2015), and included four relevant covariates (gender, age, nationality and 

form of exploitation). This resulted in a total estimation of between 5,000 to 

7,500 trafficking victims per year. The average estimate in the most recent 

years of 2014 and 2015 included in the MSE-model, came out to 6,250 

victims per year. This equals about 37 victims per 100,000 population. Dutch 

girls between 12 and 17 years old and foreign residents run the highest risk of 

being victimized: there are as many as 257 victims for every 100,000 Dutch 

girls, and 311 victims for every 100,000 foreigners. 

On average about one in five victims in the Netherlands is detected by one or 

more identifying organization. But this ‘detection-rate’ differs between 

different groups of victims.  

• The largest group of victims are victims of domestic sex trafficking. 

They make up about half of the total number of victims and turn out 

to be more hidden than other groups: only 15% of domestic sex 

trafficking victims are detected. In addition, half of all domestic sex 

trafficking victims are minors, and these minors are even more hidden 

than their adult counterparts: only 11% of underage domestic sex 

trafficking victims get detected (compared to 19% of the adult 

domestic sex trafficking victims).  

• Cross-border sex trafficking victims make up about one fifth of the 

total. This group of victims are most easily detected: about one third 

of all such victims are. Nonetheless, the majority of these victims 

remain undetected.   

• Cross-border trafficking victims of other (non-sexual) forms of 

exploitation also make up about one fifth of the total. In comparison 

to their sex-trafficking counterparts they are poorly detected: only one 

in five such victims are (in comparison to one in three cross-border 

sex trafficking victims). Half of the trafficking victims of this group 



 
 
 

   Pagina 5 van 5 
 

 

 
 
 

 
 

are males; the females tend to remain less visible (17% of the female 

victims of cross-border trafficking for non-sexual exploitation gets 

detected compared to 26% of the male victims of cross-border 

trafficking for non-sexual exploitation). 

It is exactly this information that we urgently need in order to tackle human 

trafficking more effectively. On the basis of this estimation I can show the 

Dutch government that much more effort needs to be put into the detection  

of domestic sex trafficking victims, especially minors (by the police and 

youth care providers). Similar improvements need to be made in order to 

detect cross-border trafficking for non-sexual exploitation (in particular into 

sectors in which females are exploited). I will publish these recommendations 

on October 18th: the EU’s Anti-Trafficking Day.  

I am proud of this joint research project between the UNODC and myself/my 

bureau and I am convinced that other countries will similarly benefit greatly 

from gaining insight into their blank and blind spots. Moreover, when similar 

indicative estimations in other countries become available, international 

comparisons on the different types of trafficking will be made possible. It is 

therefore my hope that this pilot study in the Netherlands will spur other 

countries to initiate similar studies that require the involvement of statistical 

experts on MSE. However, I can not stress enough that truly indicative 

estimations cannot be made by statistical experts alone. Close cooperation 

between statistical experts and national experts on human trafficking and data 

collection is essential to this end.  

 

 


