









































1

INTRODUCTION

The responsibility of governments to protect children from sexual 
violence does not end at the national borders. In this paper, we 
place the fight against sexual exploitation of children in travel 
and tourism in the broader context of combating sexual violence 
against children in general. We propose  new terminology to 
emphasize this integration of the two phenomena, and delineate 
the responsibilities of governments, both within and outside their 
borders, when it comes to protecting children from sexual violence. 
Although the cross-border element often makes it more difficult for 
governments to meet those responsibilities, it does not make them 
any less important.

Sexual exploitation of children in travel and 
tourism: what is it?

We define sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism 
(hereafter SECTT) as acts of sexual violence against children where 
the offender has crossed a border.1 It is important to stress that the 
question of whether the offender has given or promised money or 
goods to the child or any other person is irrelevant. Accordingly, 
in contrast to some other interpretations or definitions that are 
adopted internationally, this definition does not require commercial 

GOVERNMENTS’ 
RESPONSIBILITIES AS 
COUNTRIES OF DEMAND, 
SUPPLY AND/OR 
VICTIMISATION

EXPERT PAPER

SUZANNE KRAGTEN-HEERDINK, LAURA MENENTI 
AND CORINNE DETTMEIJER-VERMEULEN



2

sexual exploitation.2 Furthermore, our 
interpretation of ‘travel’ also includes 
(semi-)permanent settlement of offenders 
in other countries than their countries of 
origin (migration). However, our definition 
leaves aside sexual exploitation of children 
by domestic travellers and tourists; at least 
two different countries must be involved.

A common explanation given for SECTT 
is the assumption that the threshold for 
committing sexual violence against children 
is lower in less developed countries.3 An 
offender may find it easier to justify sexual 
violence against a child to himself4 if the child 
is living in poverty (neutralization techniques). 
For example, because he is giving the child 
or the victim's  family money or goods (denial 
of injury: ‘the child is actually grateful’), 
because the child engages in prostitution 
in order to survive (denial of the victim: ‘it’s 
what the child wants’) or because the child 
is being prostituted (denial of responsibility: 
‘sex with children is accepted here’). An 
offender might also feel that the benefits 
outweigh the risk of being punished, due to 
anonymity, the low priority given to tackling 
sexual violence against children locally, 
corruption, the possibility of offering bribes 
to the victims or their families, etc. (rational 
choice theory). Moreover, opportunities to 
commit sexual violence against children 
may be easier to find abroad, for instance in 
countries with a flourishing child prostitution 
industry (routine activity theory). The 
increasing ease with which visits to these 
countries can be arranged is also a factor, 
due to the availability of cheap flights and 
relaxed of visa restrictions.

A new terminology

In literature, countries the offenders come 
from are referred to as countries of origin 
(or source countries, exit countries or 

sending countries) and countries where 
children become victims as countries of 
destination.5 These terms are derived from 
the perspective of the offender, the person 
who moves between countries. But this 
labelling of countries causes confusion. As 
in the case of  cross-border sex trafficking, 
the immediate association made with 
SECTT is usually one of the offenders from 
countries with a relatively high standard 
of living and victims from less developed 
countries. However, in the case of cross-
border sex trafficking the person who 
moves is not the person seeking sexual 
services, in other words, the demand 
side (the offender), but the person who 
is compelled to provide those services, 
in other words, the supply side (the 
victim). Accordingly, traditional countries 
of origin in the case of SECTT are in fact 
traditional countries of destination in the 
case of cross-border sex trafficking and 
vice versa. To emphasize the relationship 
between SECTT and other forms of (cross-
border) sexual violence against children 
such as child sex trafficking, we propose 
the following terminology. 

Country of demand: the offender’s country 
of origin. This is the same in the case of both 
SECTT and cross-border sex trafficking. 
Note: in cases of sex trafficking, the term 
‘offender’ does not refer to the sex trafficker, 
but to the offender of child prostitution (the 
client of the trafficked child/minor exploited 
in prostitution).
Country of supply: the victim’s country of 
origin. This is the same in the case of both 
SECTT and cross-border sex trafficking.
Country of victimization: the country where 
the child actually becomes a victim of 
sexual violence/exploitation, which is the 
country of supply in the case of SECTT, and 
the country of demand in the case of cross-
border sex trafficking.



3

The suggested terminology also provides a 
solution for the phenomenon of livestreaming 
of child sexual exploitation material. This 
online form of SECTT does not involve either 
offender or victim crossing a border, and 
thus has no country of destination, but does 
have a country of victimisation.

Figure 1 further shows that the obvious 
associations do not fully cover the extent of 
the two phenomena. For example, children 
in countries with a relatively high standard of 
living are also abused by foreign offenders, 
just as victims of sex trafficking are also 
recruited in those countries (less familiar). 
Classifying countries as exclusively a 
country of demand or exclusively a country 
of supply, therefore, fails to reflect the actual 
reality. Furthermore, such a classification 
creates the risk of tunnel vision and the 
consequent failure to recognize SECTT 
or sex trafficking in situations that do 
not correspond with the top-of-mind 
associations. After all, the principle that if 
you don’t look, you won’t find applies to 
both phenomena. 

Sexual exploitation of children in 
travel and tourism: who should 
address it?

Children are entitled to protection against 
sexual violence. Governments are 
responsible for preventing and combating 
sexual violence against children in every 
situation in which they function as the 
country of victimisation, the country of 
demand or the country of supply. In other 
words, whenever sexual violence against 

children occurs in their own territory or 
occurs in another country but involves their 
own citizens – whether as an offender or a 
victim. A government’s responsibility does 
not end at the national borders.6

Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between 
cases of domestic sexual violence against 
children and cases with a cross-border 
component. Cross-border cases, such 
as SECTT, must therefore not be seen in 
isolation, but in the wider perspective of 
protecting the sexual integrity of children, 
always and everywhere. Figure 2 is 
an Identification Tool for (Inter)national 
situations of Sexual violence against children 
(hereafter IT-IS). Governments can use IT-IS 
as an instrument to identify every situation 
in which their country is involved – and for 
which they are therefore responsible.

IT-IS shows that there are seven 
conceivable situations where a country 
bears responsibility. Four of them (situations 
2, 3, 6 and 7) occur in the country itself (the 
country itself is the country of victimisation), 
and three (situations 1, 4 and 5) in another 
country. Only situation 2 does not involve 
any crossing of a border by the offender 
and/or the victim, the other six do. Four of 
these six cross-border situations constitute 
SECTT (situations 1, 4, 6 and 7), for in 
these situations the offender has crossed a 
border (the country of demand differs from 
the country of victimisation). The seven 
situations do not all occur to the same 
extent, while  those that are most common, 
and, therefore, deserve more attention, 
differ from one country to another. 

Figure 1: Sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism versus cross-border sex trafficking: a 
different country of victimisation



4

Naturally, IT-IS situation 2 that is a priority for 
every country: all forms of domestic sexual 
violence against children. For example, a 
father who abuses his own child at home 
or an offender from country A, guilty of child 
prostitution in that country that involves a 
minor exploited in prostitution from that 
same country (often a victim of domestic 
sex trafficking). 

In cross-border situations (situations 1, 3, 4, 
5, 6 and 7), however, there are differences 
between countries. In these situations, 
countries that function more as a country of 
demand than as a country of supply (usually 
associated with countries with a relatively 
high standard of living) should focus mainly 
on situations 3 and 4. Examples would 
include – situation 3 – an offender from 
country A, guilty of child prostitution in that 
country that involves a minor exploited in 
prostitution from another country (often a 

victim of cross-border sex trafficking). Or – 
situation 4 – a self-styled benefactor from 
country A,  volunteers in an orphanage in 
another country and abuses children there. In 
contrast, in countries that are more often the 
country of supply in cross-border situations 
(usually associated with less developed 
countries), the emphasis should be more on 
situation 5. For example an offender from 
another country, guilty of child prostitution in 
that other country that involves a minor from 
country A (often a victim of cross-border 
sex trafficking), and situation 6, for example 
an immigrant who abuses children as an 
employee of a day care centre in country 
A. This is not to say that situations 5 and 
6 do not occur in the former countries or 
situations 3 and 4 in the latter countries, so 
it is important to ensure that the focus on 
particular situations does not divert attention 
from cases that fall outside those situations 
(the risk of tunnel vision). 

Figure 2: Identification Tool for (Inter)national situations of Sexual violence against children (IT-IS)7 
[Country A can be any country. The circle in the diagram is that country’s own territory (the blue line 
marked ‘country of victimization’ therefore represents the country’s actual borders), and the four 
segments outside the circle represent the rest of the world (every other country except country A)].



5

Situations 1 and 7 are not a priority since 
instances of them usually follow on from 
the other situations. For example, situation 
1 occurs when the father in the example 
given for situation 2 also abuses his child 
during a holiday abroad. 

Governments are responsible for combating 
sexual violence against children, not only 
within but also beyond their own borders. 
IT-IS illustrates the situations in which that 
responsibility arises and how close the 
relationship is between situations of cross-
border sexual violence against children, 
such as SECTT, and cases of domestic 
sexual violence against children.

Sexual exploitation of children in 
travel and tourism: how do you 
address it? 

Governments are responsible for combating 
all forms of sexual violence against children 
in which they are involved as the country of 
demand, supply or victimization. But what 
does that responsibility involve? It follows 
from the relationship highlighted in the 
previous section that measures to address 
cross-border sexual violence against 
children should be part of, and should be 
the same as, the measures taken to combat 
domestic sexual violence against children. 
Broadly speaking, measures to combat 
domestic sexual violence against children 
(IT-IS situation 2, Figure 2) have three 
objectives:8

•	 Preventing sexual violence against 
children, with measures targeted at 
both potential victims and potential 
offenders.

•	 Identifying and punishing offenders 
of sexual violence against children, 
including measures to prevent 
recidivism.

•	 Identifying victims of sexual violence 
against children and mitigating the 
harm they suffer, including measures 
to prevent re-victimisation.

Accordingly, efforts to combat cross-border 
sexual violence against children (IT-IS 
situation 1, 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7, Figure 2) should 
be designed to achieve those same three 
objectives. The difference, however, is that 
this calls for coordination and the exchange 
of information with other countries and with 
private actors, and there are obstacles 
to that in practice. Those obstacles do 
not, however, relieve a government of 
its responsibility. Governments should 
therefore devote specific attention to 
establishing international and public-private 
cooperation in their efforts to address 
cross-border sexual violence against 
children, including SECTT.9 

The combination of the seven conceivable 
situations of sexual violence against children 
in which a country is involved according 
to IT-IS (Figure 2) and the three objectives 
of measures to combat sexual violence 
against children provides a framework that 
governments can use to shape their policies 
against SECTT. By way of an example, we 
conclude this paper with a brief analysis of 
Dutch policies to combat SECTT in relation 
to the three aforementioned objectives. 

The Dutch approach to 
combating sexual exploitation 
of children in travel and tourism

With respect to SECTT, for the Netherlands 
IT-IS situation 4  is the main priority, although 
situation 6 also occasionally occurs . One of 
the biggest cases of sexual violence against 
children in the Netherlands is an example of 
the latter. The case involved a Latvian man 
who, after a previous conviction relating 
to child sexual exploitation material in 
Germany, moved to the Netherlands and 
found work at a day care centre where he 
abused more than 80 children. 

Although the Netherlands has made 
significant progress in addressing SECTT 
in recent years, its strategy, as in many 
other countries, is still in its infancy. Some 



6

A notable omission, however, is the absence 
of measures designed to mitigate the harm 
suffered by victims (objective 3) in cases of 
SECTT in situation 4 (a Dutch national who 
commits sexual violence against a non-
Dutch child in another country). For that 
other country, IT-IS situation 6 (a foreign 
national, a Dutch citizen, who commits 
sexual violence against a child from that 
country in the country concerned). In some 
cases, that country will take responsibility 
for these victims who are its own citizens 
(as the Netherlands will do in situation 6). 
However, that leaves the question of what 
responsibility the Netherlands has in those 
cases where the other nations fails to do so.

CONCLUSION
Children are entitled to protection against 
sexual violence. The responsibility of 
governments to provide this protection is 
generally clear when sexual violence occurs 
within the borders of their country, but it 
does not end there. Governments have a 
duty to fulfil whenever they are involved as 
the country of origin of offenders (country 
of demand), the country of origin of 
victims (country of supply), or the country 
of victimisation. Broadly speaking, these 
duties are 1) to prevent sexual violence 
against children from occurring, 2) to find 
and sentence offenders and prevent them 
from reoffending, and 3) to find victims 
and minimize the damage done to them. 
Governments should strive to extend the 
application of the national measures they 
have in place for achieving these three 
goals beyond their borders whenever they 
are involved. 

measures to prevent Dutch nationals 
from committing sexual violence against 
children in other countries have already 
been adopted or are being developed (see 
objective 1). They include the imposition 
of restrictions on the liberty of child sex 
offenders convicted in the Netherlands with 
a high risk of recidivism.  The restrictions 
prevent them from travelling abroad after 
serving their sentence.10 But also, for 
example, the exchange of information 
and the transfer of supervision within 
the European Union for a select group of 
mobile high risk child sex offenders (see 
the Serious Offending by Mobile European 
Criminals (SOMEC) project).11 Another 
measure falling under objective 1 is the 
sharing of information with other countries 
about the criminal records of persons who 
wish to work with children abroad.12 

Dutch authorities have also taken measures 
to achieve objective 2: identifying, reporting, 
investigating, prosecuting, trying and 
punishing Dutch nationals who have been 
guilty of sexual violence against children 
in another country. In 2016 and 2017, for 
example, the Netherlands will coordinate 
the European campaign entitled ‘Don’t 
look away’, the aim of which is to create 
a broad international structure for the 
identification and subsequent reporting of 
SECTT.13 The basic principle of the policy 
towards the investigation and prosecution 
of offenders is that it should take place in 
the country of victimisation.14 In situation 4, 
this is a country other than the Netherlands. 
The Netherlands has intensified its efforts 
to share information and provide legal 
assistance, for example by appointing 
liaison officers, by cooperating with non-
governmental organizations and by 
making formal arrangements (in multilateral 
or bilateral treaties or Memoranda of 
Understanding).15



7

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Colby, M. Partnerships to End Child Sex Tourism. Posted 22 July 2011. http://blog.usaid.
gov/2011/07/partnerships-to-end-child-sex-tourism/.

Council of Europe (2007). Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual 
Exploitation and Sexual Abuse.

Defence for Children-ECPAT the Netherlands (2013). Protection of children against sexual 
exploitation in tourism. Leiden: Defence for Children-ECPAT the Netherlands.

Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice (April 2015). “Voortgangsrapportage Kinderpornografie 
en Kindersekstoerisme (Progress report on Child Pornography and Child Sex Tourism)”. 
Parliamentary Documents II 2014/15, 31 015, nr. 112. The Hague.

Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice (June 2015). “Coördinatie Europese campagne 
kindersekstoerisme “Don’t Look Away” (Coordination European campaign against child 
sex tourism “Don’t Look Away”)”. Parliamentary Documents II 2014/15, 31 015, nr. 113. 
The Hague.

Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice (October 2013). “Plan van Aanpak Kindersekstoerisme 
(Action Plan against Child Sex Tourism)”. Supplement 1 Parliamentary Documents II 
2013/14, 31 015, nr. 93. The Hague. 

Dutch Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children 
(2013). “Barriers against child sex tourism, Summary report”. The Hague: Dutch Rapporteur. 
Accessed from http://www.dutchrapporteur.nl/reports/child-sex-tourism/ .

First World Congress against Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children (1996). 
Declaration and Agenda for Action. 

Kemshall, H., G. Kelly, B. Wilkinson and S. Hilder (2015). Offender Management User 
Guidance, Assessment and Management of Serious Mobile European Criminals. SOMEC. 

Long, B.J. “It’s not easy being a child lover: applying techniques of neutralization theory 
to case studies of intergenerational intimacy in the Philippines”. International Journal of 
Psychosocial Rehabilitation 15, no. 2 (2011). pp. 79-84.

Long, B.J. “It’s not easy being a child lover: applying techniques of neutralization theory 
to case studies of intergenerational intimacy in the Philippines”. International Journal of 
Psychosocial Rehabilitation 15, no. 2 (2011). pp. 79-84.

Newman, W.J., B.W. Holt, J.S. Rabun, G.P. Philips and C.L. Scott. “Child sex tourism: 
extending the borders of sexual offender legislation”. International Journal of Law and 
Psychiatry 34 (2011): pp. 116-121.

Tanielian, A.R. “Illicit supply and demand: child sex exploitation in South East Asia”. National 
Taiwan University Law Review 8, no. 1 (2013): pp. 97-140.

UN Special Procedures (2012). “Report of the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, 
child prostitution and child pornography, Najat Maalla M’jid”. UN Doc. A/HRC/22/54.

United Nations (1989). Convention on the Rights of the Child. 

United Nations (2000). Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on 
the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography.

Walters, J. and P.H. Davis. “Human trafficking, sex tourism, and child exploitation on the 
southern border”. Journal of applied research on children: informing policy for children at risk 
2, no. 1 (2011): article 6.

Zafft, C.R. and S. Tidball (2010). “A survey of child sex tourism in the Philippines”. Paper 
22 presented at the Second Annual Interdisciplinary Conference on Human Trafficking. 
Lincoln, United States of America. 30 September-2 October 2010.

http://blog.usaid.gov/2011/07/partnerships-to-end-child-sex-tourism/
http://blog.usaid.gov/2011/07/partnerships-to-end-child-sex-tourism/
http://www.dutchrapporteur.nl/reports/child-sex-tourism/


8

ENDNOTES

1. Sexual violence against children covers all sexual acts that are offences under the Dutch 
Criminal Code and of which children are the victims, and includes both hands-on (sexual 
abuse of a child, child prostitution) and hands-off (child sexual exploitation material, for 
example) offences. These encompass all behaviour that constitutes sexual exploitation 
and sexual abuse of children as referred to in the Council of Europe Convention on the 
Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (2007) (Lanzarote 
Convention).

2. The synonym ‘child sex tourism’ is often defined as a specific form of commercial sexual 
exploitation of children, for example by the Special Rapporteur on the sale of children, 
child prostitution and child pornography (UN Special Procedures, “Report of the Special 
Rapporteur on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, Najat Maalla 
M’jid”, UN Doc. A/HRC/22/54, (2012), para. 17).

3. B.J. Long, “It’s not easy being a child lover: applying techniques of neutralization theory 
to case studies of intergenerational intimacy in the Philippines”, International Journal of 
Psychosocial Rehabilitation 15, no. 2 (2011): 79-84; W.J. Newman, et al., “Child sex tourism: 
extending the borders of sexual offender legislation”, International Journal of Law and 
Psychiatry 34 (2011): 116-121; J. Walters and P.H. Davis, “Human trafficking, sex tourism, 
and child exploitation on the southern border”, Journal of applied research on children: 
informing policy for children at risk 2, no. 1 (2011): article 6; M. Colby, “Partnerships to End 
Child Sex Tourism”, posted 22 July 2011, http://blog.usaid.gov/2011/07/partnerships-to-
end-child-sex-tourism/; A.R. Tanielian, “Illicit supply and demand: child sex exploitation in 
South East Asia”, National Taiwan University Law Review 8, no. 1 (2013): 97-140; Defence 
for Children-ECPAT the Netherlands, Protection of children against sexual exploitation 
in tourism (Leiden: Defence for Children-ECPAT the Netherlands, 2013), 7; C.R. Zafft 
and S. Tidball, “A survey of child sex tourism in the Philippines”, (paper 22 presented 
at the Second Annual Interdisciplinary Conference on Human Trafficking, Lincoln, 30 
September-2 October 2010).

4. Or ‘herself’. In this paper, the use of the masculine pronoun in relation to offenders always 
refers also to female offenders.

5. For example in the Declaration and Agenda for Action (1996) of the First World Congress 
against Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children.

6. See also article 4, Optional Protocol to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child on 
the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography (2000).

7. NB: the offender in this case is the offender for whom committing sexual violence against 
children is the sole purpose of his actions (as with the offender of child prostitution for 
instance). It is expressly not the sex trafficker, whose objective is (also) profit.

8. See also article 19, UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989). 
9. See also art. 10, Optional Protocol to the CRC and art. 38, Lanzarote Convention.
10. Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, “Voortgangsrapportage Kinderpornografie en 

Kindersekstoerisme (Progress report on Child Pornography and Child Sex Tourism)”, 
Parliamentary Documents II 2014/15, 31 015, nr. 112 (The Hague, April 2015).

11. H. Kemshall, G. Kelly, B. Wilkinson and S. Hilder, Offender Management User Guidance, 
Assessment and Management of Serious Mobile European Criminals (SOMEC, 2015), 45. 

12. Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, “Plan van Aanpak Kindersekstoerisme (Action 
Plan against Child Sex Tourism)”, supplement 1 Parliamentary Documents II 2013/14, 
31 015, nr. 93 (The Hague, October 2013), 6-7; Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, 
“Voortgangsrapportage (Progress report)”.

13. Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, “Coördinatie Europese campagne kindersekstoerisme 
“Don’t Look Away” (Coordination European campaign child sex tourism “Don’t Look 
Away”)”, Parliamentary Documents II 2014/15, 31 015, nr. 113 (The Hague, June 2015).

14. Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, “Plan van Aanpak (Action Plan)”, 9.
15. Dutch Ministry of Security and Justice, “Voortgangsrapportage (Progress report)”.

http://blog.usaid.gov/2011/07/partnerships-to-end-child-sex-tourism/
http://blog.usaid.gov/2011/07/partnerships-to-end-child-sex-tourism/


9

Global Study Exploitation of Children in Travel and Tourism
Email: globalstudysectt@ecpat.net
Website: globalstudysectt.org

Contact

ABOUT THE AUTHORS

Suzanne kragten-heerdink 

Researcher for the Dutch Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence 
against Children.

Laura menenti

Researcher for the Dutch Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence 
against Children.

Corinne dettmeijer-vermeulen

Dutch Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children, 
who is also a member of the High Level Taskforce to end Sexual Exploitation of Children 
in Travel & Tourism. The Dutch Rapporteur’s remit is to report on the nature and scale 
of trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children, to conduct research 
into policy and the effects of policy in these areas and to make recommendations to the 
Dutch government on improvements that can be made in efforts to address the problems. 
In 2013 the Dutch Rapporteur published a report concerned specifically with measures 
aimed at Dutch nationals who commit sex offences against children abroad. A summary 
of the report is available in English: Dutch Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and 
Sexual Violence against Children, “Barriers against child sex tourism, Summary report” 
(The Hague: Dutch Rapporteur, 2013). Accessed from http://www.dutchrapporteur.nl/
reports/child-sex-tourism/


