

































































































































































































































































































































Trafficking in Human Beings
Ten years of independent monitoring



Colophon

Reference: National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings (2010).
Human Trafficking – ten years of independent monitoring. The Hague: BNRM

Bureau of the Dutch National Rapporteur
P.O.Box 20301
2500 EH The Hague
+31703704514
www.bnrm.nl

Production and layout: Het vlakke land, Rotterdam

© bnrm 2010



0	 Content

 Overview of Figures and Tables 5
 Foreword 7

1 The office of National Rapporteur 9
 1.1 Introduction 9
 1.2 Interviews 14
 1.3 A look into the future 20

2 Recommendations and developments 23
 2.1 Introduction 23
 2.2 Legislation 24
 2.3 International developments 31
 2.4 Victims 39
 2.5 Immigration law 46
 2.6 Supervision, enforcement and investigation in the sex industry 57
 2.7 Training, awareness and identification 65
 2.8 Prosecution and trial 77

3  Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009 87
 3.1 Introduction 87
 3.2 Data collection 87
 3.3 Victims 89
 3.4 Suspects and offenders 112

4  The National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings  
in the Netherlands: Ten Years On 139

  Bibliography 145
 Appendix 149

A1 Article 273f of the Dutch criminal code (non-official translation) 151
 I  Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code (valid until 1 July 2009) 151
 I I  Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code (valid from 1 July 2009) 152



A2  Explanatory notes to Figures, Tables and Statistics 155

A3 Additional tables 157
 Supplement to § 3.3.1: Victims in the CoMensha register 157
 Supplement to § 3.3.2 Victims and the B9 regulation 179
 Supplement to § 3.3.3: Victims and compensation 192
 Supplement to § 3.4.1: Suspects and offenders - Prosecution 194
 Supplement to § 3.4.2: Suspects and offenders - Trial (in first instance) 203
 Supplement to § 3.4.2: Suspects and offenders – Trial (on appeal) 212
 Supplement to § 3.4.3: Suspects and offenders - Characteristics 215

A4 List of activities of BNRM in 2009 231
 1 Interviews, meetings and working visits (Netherlands)  231
 2 Congresses, symposia, study days and lectures (Netherlands) 234
 3 International working visits, congresses and other activities 236



0	 Overview	of	Figures	and	Tables

Figure 3.1 Number of reported victims (2000-2009)
Figure 3.2 Gender of reported victims (2000-2009)
Figure 3.3 Age of reported victims (2001-2009)
Table 3.1 Ranking of the top 5 nationalities of reported victims (2000-2009)
Figure 3.4 Trend in the overall top 5 nationalities of reported victims (2000-2009)
Table 3.2 Ranking of top 5 nationalities of reported underage victims (2006-2009)
Figure 3.5  Proportion of underage victims among Dutch, Nigerian and other non-Dutch re-

ported victims (2006-2009)
Figure 3.6 Sectors in which victims were exploited (2007-2009)
Figure 3.7a Notifiers (2001)
Figure 3.7b Notifiers (2009)
Figure 3.8 Purpose of notification: (registration ánd) shelter (2009)
Figure 3.9 Number of B9 applications (2000-2009)
Figure 3.10 Number of B9 awards (2000-2009)
Figure 3.11 Gender of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
Figure 3.12 Age of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
Table 3.3 Ranking of top 5 nationalities of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
Figure 3.13 Trend in the overall top 5 nationalities of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
Figure 3.14 Region of origin of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
Figure 3.15a Police regions from which successful B9 applications were made (2000) 
Figure 3.15b Police regions from which successful B9 applications were made (2009) 
Figure 3.16 Number of compensation orders made (2000-2009)
Figure 3.17 Compensation orders by amount awarded (2000-2009)
Figure 3.18 Compensation orders by disposition (total from 2000-2009)
Figure 3.19 Compensation orders by amount paid (total from 2000-2009)
Table 3.4 Overview of data on victims
Figure 3.20 Number of cases registered by the PPS (2000-2009)
Figure 3.21 Registered cases involving underage victims (2000-2008)
Figure 3.22 Registered cases, by court district (total from 2000-2008)
Figure 3.23 Nature of the registered cases (2000-2008)
Figure 3.24 Registered cases, by most serious offence (2000-2008)
Figure 3.25 Registered cases and preventive custody (2000-2008)
Figure 3.26 Number of cases dealt with by the PPS (2000-2009)
Figure 3.27 Cases dealt with by the PPS, by disposition (2000-2008)
Figure 3.28 Number of cases dealt with in first instance (2000-2008)



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
6

Figure 3.29 Cases dealt with in first instance, by disposition (2000-2008)
Figure 3.30 Nature of the convictions in first instance (2000-2008)
Figure 3.31 Convictions, by sentence imposed (2000-2008)
Figure 3.32 Custodial sentences, by length of sentence (2000-2008)
Figure 3.33 Cases dealt with in first instance in which an appeal was filed (2000-2008)
Figure 3.34 Number of cases dealt with on appeal (2000-2008)
Figure 3.35 Cases dealt with on appeal, by disposition (2000-2004 and 2005-2008)
Figure 3.36 Convictions on appeal, by sentence imposed (2000-2004 and 2005-2008)
Figure 3.37  Custodial sentences imposed on appeal, by length of sentence (2000-2004 and 

2005-2008)
Figure 3.38 Number of suspects registered by the PPS (2000-2009)
Figure 3.39 Number of persons convicted in first instance (2000-2008)
Figure 3.40 Gender of suspects (2000-2008)
Figure 3.41 Gender of convicted offenders (2000-2008)
Figure 3.42 Age of suspects (2000-2008)
Figure 3.43 Age of convicted offenders (2000-2008)
Table 3.5 Ranking of top five countries of birth of suspects (2000-2008)
Figure 3.44 Trend in the overall top 5 countries of birth of suspects (2000-2008)
Table 3.6 Ranking of top 5 countries of birth of convicted offenders (2000-2008)
Figure 3.45 Trend in overall top 5 countries of birth of convicted offenders (2000-2008)
Table 3.7 Overview of data on suspects and offenders



0	 Foreword

This report marks the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the post of National Rapporteur on 
Trafficking in Human Beings as an independent monitoring mechanism of the Netherlands’ efforts to 
combat human trafficking. It also marks ten years of making recommendations, 200 in all. Many of those 
recommendations have been acted upon, the importance of some has receded and others have been 
regularly repeated. This report outlines the progress made in efforts to tackle human trafficking in the 
Netherlands over the last ten years in light of those recommendations. 

This report contains no new recommendations. Nevertheless, the contents clearly illustrate the aspects 
of the fight against human trafficking that still give cause for concern and demand vigilance. New de-
velopments are highlighted that might present a different kind of challenge in the efforts to combat 
human trafficking.

Political and public attention for the subject of human trafficking has grown in the last ten years. Tack-
ling human trafficking is a priority for the police and the public prosecution service. The growing public 
and political awareness of human trafficking has also increased the abhorrence of this abject form of 
crime. The political outrage is reflected in the decision to raise the maximum sentences for this serious 
offence with effect from 1 July 2009.

At the same time, the statistics show that the number of criminal cases registered by the district offices of 
the public prosecution service has fluctuated over the years and that in 2009 the figure was lower than in 
2000. The statistics also show that the proportion of custodial sentences of less than one year is increa-
sing, while prison sentences of more than four years are declining, both in first instance and on appeal.

Any self-respecting society should do everything in its power to ensure that the five Ps, prevention, pro-
tection, prosecution, punishment and partnership, which together form the cornerstone of efforts to combat 
human trafficking, are a constant and integral facet of anti-trafficking policies and their implementation 
in practice. That was also the message conveyed by the European Court of Human Rights in its judgment 
in the case of Rantsev versus Cyprus and Russia.

Effective progress depends on cooperation between the various actors responsible for implementing 
the 5P paradigm. Enormous efforts have also been made in this respect in recent years. But cooperation 
in the anti-trafficking chain is not in itself a magic formula. Success demands a constant willingness on 
the part of every actor to help find solutions for those elements of the paradigm that are not necessarily 
their own direct responsibility.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
8

Human trafficking is a worldwide problem. Although roughly a quarter of the registered victims in the 
last ten years were Dutch, the majority are still people who have fled from poverty in their own country 
in search of a more dignified existence, only to end up being exploited in the sex industry or in other 
sectors.

Their experience is vividly illustrated by ‘Journey’, an exhibition that BNRM is bringing to the Nether-
lands to mark its tenth anniversary. The exhibition tells the story of a young East European girl who was 
trafficked for the purpose of exploitation in prostitution in the United Kingdom. The exhibition makes 
a deep impression and provides inspiration for continuing the fight against human trafficking.

For the last ten years the Rapporteur has held a mirror up to the agencies engaged in the fight against 
human trafficking in the Netherlands. They have looked in that mirror.

Various agencies and individuals helped in the production of this report. I am very grateful to Comensha, 
the IND and the CJIB for their assistance and for the data they provided. I would also like to thank the 
WODC (Siba) for its analysis of the public prosecution service’s data.

As always, the staff of BNRM has displayed the inspiration they draw from the subject of human traf-
ficking. I would also like to thank them.

C.E.Dettmeijer-Vermeulen
National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings



1	 The	office	of	National	Rapporteur

1.1	 Introduction
The basis for the appointment of a National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings in the Nether-
lands was laid by the The Hague Declaration, which was adopted in 1997 following a ministerial confe-
rence on trafficking in women organised by the European Union (EU).1 One of the recommendations 
made in this Declaration was that member states should appoint national rapporteurs to report to their 
governments on the scale, prevention and combating of trafficking in women. National rapporteurs 
were also encouraged to promote mutual cooperation on a regular basis.2 This description of the tasks of 
national rapporteurs remains valid to this day. The European Council’s conclusions on the establishment 
of an informal network of national rapporteurs on trafficking in human beings or similar mechanisms 
in 2009 also illustrates the need for objective, reliable, comparable and up-to-date strategic informa-
tion about human trafficking in the EU.NRM7 3 In these documents, the scope of the offence is no longer 
confined to trafficking in women, but extends to trafficking in human beings.

The nature of the mandate requires that the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings must 
be independent.4 The Rapporteur submits annual reports to the Minister of Justice. The government 
responds to the reports and informs parliament of its conclusions. Through these reports, the Rappor-
teur plays an important role in monitoring policies to combat human trafficking and the associated 
legislation. The government generally publishes a reaction to substantive reports by the Rapporteur, 
which is then the subject of a plenary debate in the Lower House of Parliament. The fight against 
human trafficking is a topic that is also regularly addressed in the election manifestos of many of the 
political parties.

This chapter discusses the steps taken to monitor and report on efforts to combat human trafficking. 
After a brief review of a report that can be regarded as an early precursor of the reports of today’s 
Rapporteur, there is a brief discussion of the terms of reference of the Rapporteur and of equiva-
lent mechanisms in other countries. The following sections contain interviews with three different 
rapporteurs: the current UN Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons, the first National Rapporteur in 

1 The Hague ministerial declaration on European guidelines for effective measures to prevent and combat trafficking in 
women for the purpose of sexual exploitation.

2 Ibidem, III.1.4. See also NRM1, Chapter 3.
3 Council Conclusions on establishing an informal EU Network of National Rapporteurs or Equivalent Mechanisms on Traf-

ficking in Human Beings, 2946th meeting, Luxembourg, 4 June 2009.
4 See the interviews in § 1.2. 



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
10

the Netherlands and Finland’s first National Rapporteur. The chapter concludes with a glimpse into 
the future, including a consideration of the recent expansion of the tasks of the Rapporteur in the 
Netherlands.

1.1.1 A brief history
As early as the beginning of the 20th century, research into the nature and scale of human trafficking was 
conducted in the Netherlands.5 In 1900, J. Balkestein, a police inspector in Haarlem, went undercover in 
the world of prostitution in an attempt to unravel the practices of traffickers in women.6 The report of 
that investigation can be regarded as an early precursor of the reports of today’s Rapporteur. The author 
of the report made a number of recommendations on the basis of his investigation. One noteworthy 
recommendation was that the government should continue conducting research into the nature and 
scale of human trafficking. In 1908, the ‘National office for the collection of data concerning so-called 
traffic in women and girls’ was established.7 This office can also be regarded as an early precursor of the 
Office of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings (BNRM).8

The author’s recommendations concerning the treatment of victims and his analysis of the methods 
used at that time to induce women to prostitute themselves remain valid to this day. The following text 
box contains a passage from the concluding section of the report in 1901.

Report of an investigation into trafficking in women9

‘Your assignment to me read: conduct a study into the nature and scale of the trafficking in women 
and girls in this country. Your committee suspected that such trafficking existed and wished to 
know to what extent it could be combated. I feel that careful consideration of my report will show 
that it has provided important building blocks for answering the latter question. Nevertheless, 
because of my investigation, I am perhaps better placed than anyone to judge how necessary it 
is for such work to continue and, in that context, feel justified in making the following comments 
in view of the possibility that either the government or private parties will later conduct similar 
investigations again.
If a study is to be complete, it is not enough for the police to confine themselves to providing 
information; they will have to provide their direct cooperation, which they undoubtedly would 
have done if the investigation had been commissioned by the government. Experience has taught 
me that the best method of investigation is to question the prostitutes. In that context, the main 
priority for the researcher is not to learn how the interviewees feel about their own lives, but only 
how they have become who they are.
[…] There are two ways of doing this, both of which must be followed. Questioning the women 
themselves and verifying what they have said. […] For the first, the questioning of the women them-
selves, the two main requirements are that the women are questioned as far as possible beyond 
the influence of the brothel owner or madam and that the interviewer possesses the maximum 
possible knowledge of human nature and experience so that he is able to form something of an 

5 Balkestein, 1901. 
6 For more background information on the production of this report and the measures taken in response 

to the recommendations, see Blekendaal 2007. 
7 Royal Decree of 13 March 1908, Bulletin of Acts, Order and Decrees, no. 85.
8 For a description of the history of the establishment of the post of Rapporteur, see NRM1, chapter 3.
9 Balkestein, 1901.



The office of National Rapporteur
11

impression of what the woman before him was like before she entered prostitution, and finally, 
that he is able to win the trust of the woman.
[…] It will be impossible to gain a satisfactory answer to the question of whether violence or decep-
tion on the part of traffickers is an important element in women and girls becoming prostitutes if 
one persists in searching for the very few cases where entirely innocent girls or women are brought 
into prostitution by acts of open violence or deception entirely against their will and without their 
prior knowledge. […] What one should search for is the following: are a series of acts of indirect 
compulsion and deception committed by a large number of persons acting in concert against 
women and girls, whose lives may not be unimpeachable, but who without these acts of indirect 
compulsion and deception would still never have accepted the life of a prostitute, as I have par-
tially described it above and has been explored for the first time by me? Although I acknowledge 
that this question has been posed in such a way that it must already influence the answer, I am 
still firmly convinced that only by proceeding in the direction I suggest is an investigation likely 
to bear fruit and lead to the answer to the question of how this indirect coercion and deception 
can be tackled.’

1.1.2  Terms of Reference of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking  
in Human Beings

The task of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings is report annually on the nature 
and scale of human trafficking, the mechanisms that play a role in human trafficking, the developments 
taking place in this field and the effects of relevant policy. The Rapporteur has no executive tasks at 
operational level.10

The Rapporteur is assisted by the staff of the Office of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human 
Beings, which gathers quantitative and qualitative information through its own research, through se-
condary analysis of existing databases, and by organising meetings and attending regular consultations. 
BNRM is also represented on review committees for studies into subjects relating to human trafficking 
and associated topics.11 The Rapporteur also participates in international forums, such as steering groups 
and roundtable meetings on EU policy to combat human trafficking.
It is difficult to measure the scale of human trafficking. The Rapporteur has repeatedly referred in re-
ports to how important it is for the responsible agencies to keep proper records so that quantitative 
data can be collected about human trafficking and the efforts to address it.12 Better registration and 
improved methods of registration of victims also remain important areas of concern at the interna-
tional level.13 Such quantitative records can, however, give a distorted view of reality.NRM5 Qualitative 
research is therefore also important for a deeper insight into human trafficking. This is reflected, for 

10 The most recent appointment is laid down in the Regulation of 28 October 2009, no. 5627003/09, on 
the appointment of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings (Regulation on the ap-
pointment of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 2009), Government Gazette, 2009, 
18798. 

11 One of these was the second evaluation of the lifting of the ban on brothels. For a list of other review 
committees of which BNRM is a member, see the lists of activities in the reports, and appendix 4.

12 NRM1, recommendation 27; NRM 3, recommendation 33; NRM5, recommendations 61 and 64; NRM7, 
recommendations 41 to 45.

13 For example, see Kutnick et al., 2007. This publication used data from the Dutch Rapporteur and des-
cribed various methods of registration relating to human trafficking.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
12

example, in the recommendations to find out more about what happens to victims after they have been 
recognised as such.14

Other recommendations in the last 10 years have concerned the desirability of research into other sub-
jects, such as the disappearance of victims from shelters and the reasons for it, as well as the experiences 
of victims after they have returned to their country of origin.15 The Rapporteur has also referred to the 
importance of thoroughly investigating whether prostitutes who work legally are victims of human traf-
ficking.16 If research that has been recommended has not been carried out, the Rapporteur may decide 
to conduct the research personally, especially if the subject is urgent.
The first report was primarily a survey of the state of affairs with respect to human trafficking and the 
efforts being made to tackle it at that time, which was shortly after the abolition of the general ban on 
brothels. BNRM has carried out more research of its own for many of the subsequent reports. One of the 
studies involved an exploration of the existence of exploitation outside the sex industry (‘other forms of 
exploitation’) following the entry into force in 2005 of the new article of the criminal code on human 
trafficking. The results of that study appeared in the Fifth report, which also published the findings of 
a study into financial investigations. For the most recent report, BNRM conducted studies into the ap-
plication of the non-punishment principle, cases that have been ‘shelved’ by the police and objections 
to decisions not to prosecute (Article 12 of the Code of Criminal Procedure) and the case-law on human 
trafficking in the sex industry.
Because good research is extremely important for combating human trafficking effectively, the growing 
academic interest in the subject of human trafficking is a welcome development.

1.1.3 National rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms in other countries
Various international bodies, including the United Nations (UN), have urged countries to appoint rap-
porteurs.17 The explanatory report to the Council of Europe’s Convention on Action against Trafficking 
in Human Beings (2005) – which also calls for the appointment of national rapporteurs or equivalent 
mechanisms – expressly mentions the Dutch national rapporteur as an example of an independent 
monitoring mechanism.18

Following the European Commission’s evaluation of the EU Action Plan on Human Trafficking in 2008, 
one of the principal recommendations made by the Commission was to establish national rapporteurs 
or equivalent mechanisms.19 The Commission said these national agencies should be given the task 
of monitoring trends in human trafficking as well as the results of policies and measures to combat 
human trafficking. The Council of Ministers of the European Union adopted conclusions on the subject 

14 NRM 3, recommendation 29.
15 NRM3, recommendation 29.
16 NRM5, recommendation 18.
17 For example, the UN General Assembly (in resolution A/RES/59/166 of 10 February 2005) recommended 

the appointment of national rapporteurs. A report on the UK by Anti-Slavery International stated that: 
‘An independent National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings should be established in the UK, 
along the lines of the role of the Dutch National Rapporteur’ (Anti-Slavery International, 2006, p.30).

18 The Convention calls on States Parties to consider appointing a national rapporteur (or equivalent me-
chanism) for monitoring the anti-trafficking activities of State institutions and the implementation of 
national legislation requirements, Article 29 (4) of the Council of Europe Convention on Action against 
Trafficking in Human Beings, Bulletin of Treaties 2006, 99.

19 The Hague Declaration of 1997 also called for the appointment of national rapporteurs. See § 1.1.



The office of National Rapporteur
13

in June 2009.NRM7 There is now an informal network of national rapporteurs, which is an important 
step since national rapporteurs can promote the exchange of best practices and share experiences at 
national and European level. The network has held two meetings so far.20

There are not yet many other countries with an independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human 
beings.21 In practice, a growing number of countries have established an equivalent mechanism, which 
is usually integrated in a ministry or the police force.
A number of countries have appointed a coordinator, in addition to a national rapporteur or equivalent 
mechanism.NRM7 In some cases, the same agency performs the role of coordinator and of national rap-
porteur (or equivalent mechanism).

Coordination
The purpose of coordinating mechanisms is to match policies with measures taken to combat 
human trafficking. For example, the Council of Europe’s Convention on Action against Trafficking 
in Human Beings provides that the parties must take steps to coordinate the policies and measures 
of ministries and other public bodies responsible for combating human trafficking. Where appro-
priate, they should establish special bodies for that purpose.
The Action Plan of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) (2003) refers to 
the appointment of national coordinators as an element of national referral mechanisms. This means 
that every member state must create an instrument for providing help and protection to victims. The 
national referral mechanism is assigned a referring and coordinating task in the activities of the part-
ners in the anti-trafficking chain. According to the OSCE Action Plan, it should create a framework 
that both enables the member state to meet its obligations towards victims and provide a mecha-
nism in which civil-society organisations and the relevant government institutions can cooperate.22

In its annual report for 2008, the OSCE published an evaluation of the progress made in drafting na-
tional action plans and establishing national coordination structures and reporting mecha nisms.23 
Although there was variation in the structures of national coordination mechanisms, at least 58% 
of the member states and partner countries had such a mechanism. Slightly less than 40% (26) of 
the member states and partner countries said that they have a national rapporteur or equivalent 
mechanism, while almost 24% of the states reported that they did not.

In the Netherlands, the Ministry of Justice coordinates the formulation of policy. The Task Force on Hu-
man Trafficking also plays a coordinating role, in the sense of providing a platform where the partners 
responsible for preventing and combating human trafficking can meet to identify areas where efforts 
are falling short and eliminate problems by removing practical obstacles. The members of the task force 
represent the entire spectrum from prevention to prosecution and improving the position of victims.24

20 The most recent meeting was held in Brussels on 2 June 2010.
21 Finland has an independent rapporteur. In Belgium, a reporting mechanism very similar to that of 

the Netherlands is the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism, which also reports 
annually on measures to combat human trafficking.

22 As far as referrals in relation to victims are concerned, CoMensha (until the end of 2007 the Stichting 
tegen Vrouwenhandel (STV)) is the central body in the Netherlands for the notification, placement and 
registration of victims of human trafficking, see § 2.4.3. 

23 NRM7, pp. 97 et seq.
24 Decision establishing the Task Force, Government Gazette 2008, 47..



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
14

1.2	 Interviews
This section contains interviews with three different rapporteurs: the UN Special Rapporteur on Traf-
ficking in Persons, the first independent National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings in the 
Netherlands and Finland’s first National Rapporteur. Finland was the latest country to appoint an inde-
pendent National Rapporteur.

1.2.1 Joy Ngozi Ezeilo,	UN Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons25

Joy Ezeilo, the current UN Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons, especially women and children, is the second person 
to occupy that position.26 The task of the rapporteur is to focus on the human rights of victims of human trafficking and to 
report each year to the Commission, as well as making recommendations on measures that might be required to protect the 
human rights of victims. The rapporteur also receives individual complaints of violations of human rights of victims and 
undertakes working visits to countries in order to make recommendations for improvements in the prevention of human 
trafficking and in measures to address it and for improvements in the protection of the human rights of victims.NRM5

Because the UN Special Rapporteur also has an important role in monitoring international policy on human trafficking, this 
interview with her is very relevant to this chapter on the work of rapporteurs.

Appointment of the UN Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons
I was appointed as UN Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons, especially women and children, in 
June 2008. My term of office commenced in August of that year and runs until 2011. I was appointed by 
the UN Human Rights Council. When I heard of my nomination, I had no reservations about accepting 
the position. Of course I realised that the position would carry enormous responsibility and significant 
obligations. It was, however, an opportunity for me, and a privilege to lead this process at a global level 
and to be able to report to the General Assembly in New York.

Challenges as UN Special Rapporteur
As rapporteur, I see a number of challenges in the fight against human trafficking. The first major 
challenge is to gather reliable statistics on human trafficking. There are conflicting estimates of the 
scale of human trafficking from different organisations and countries. It is therefore very difficult to be 
certain about the scale of the problem, which underlines the need for the systematic and coordinated 
collection and management of data. The lack of reliable data makes it difficult to ascertain whether 
the number of victims of human trafficking is rising or falling. Take the economic crisis, for example. 
There may be more victims of human trafficking at the moment because of the crisis, but the difficulty 
of acquiring reliable statistics complicates efforts to generate reliable data on the possible effects of 
the crisis.
Prosecuting human trafficking is also difficult. Human trafficking is a criminal activity; it is dynamic and 
the methods employed by human traffickers are constantly changing. Those factors make prosecuting 
human traffickers a complex business. In many countries, it is difficult to gather evidence. It is therefore 
important for countries to share information.
Human trafficking has been made a criminal offence in most countries but the definition of the offence 
is not always equally comprehensive. In many countries, although sexual exploitation of women and 
children has been criminalised, other forms of exploitation or trafficking of men have not. Furthermore, 

25 Joy Ngozi Ezeilo was interviewed by telephone on 26 May 2010. 
26 The decision to appoint the UN Special Rapporteur was made by the UN Human Rights Commission in 

April 2004, UN Doc. E/CN.4/2004/L.62.



The office of National Rapporteur
15

in some countries human trafficking has been criminalised under the definition of another offence, such 
as kidnapping. That is ineffective and I would like to see specific national legislation for every form of 
human trafficking.
Effective coordination of efforts to combat human trafficking is still a problem. Countries should have 
national rapporteurs who can act as coordinators. These rapporteurs should have statutory powers to 
address human trafficking. Countries should also have a national action plan containing specific mea-
sures designed to combat human trafficking. National action plans and national rapporteurs on human 
trafficking help us to monitor and evaluate policy. They can also provide statistics that can be used to 
measure the effectiveness of steps taken to prevent human trafficking, to prosecute suspects and to 
protect victims.

Vulnerable groups of victims
Child victims of human trafficking are particularly vulnerable. They need a different form of interven-
tion than adult victims, but at the moment there is no specific approach tailored to the needs of young 
victims of human trafficking. The same applies for male victims, such as victims of exploitation outside 
the sex industry. Many countries have no shelters for male victims. This is an aspect that we need to focus 
on. I am also concerned about the forced surrender of organs. We know that this is a growing pheno-
menon, which is why it is important for more action to be taken in this area, starting with the creation 
of the correct legal framework.

Five Ps, three Rs and three Cs
In addressing human trafficking I focus on the five Ps, three Rs and three Cs. Let me explain what 
the letters stand for.

Five Ps
The five Ps stand for protection of victims, prosecution, punishment, prevention and promotion 
of international cooperation.
In my view, prevention must be at the heart of efforts to combat human trafficking. We do not 
do enough in terms of prevention, tending instead to focus mainly on the problems. However, 
people need information and advice about human trafficking, particularly vulnerable groups. That 
is the key to preventing human trafficking. The fifth P, promotion of international cooperation, is 
also very important. Human trafficking does not recognise borders. It affects every country in the 
world: countries of origin, countries of transit and countries of destination. We have to cooperate; 
we have to share information.

Three Rs
The three Rs stand for redress, rehabilitation and reintegration. Redress is very important for vic-
tims who must, for example, be compensated for loss of income and for the harm caused to them. 
This compensation must be recovered from the human trafficker.
We need to be mindful of rehabilitation since that helps us to understand the practical needs of 
victims, such as access to medical care, medical facilities and adequate shelter.
As far as the reintegration of victims is concerned, cooperation between countries and organisation 
is important. When a victim returns to his or her country of origin, cooperation with the authorities 
and with organisations in that country are essential for the victim’s successful reintegration.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
16

Three Cs
The three Cs highlight the need for capacity, coordination and cooperation. These elements are 
needed to address human trafficking effectively. Coordination is essential for the correct identifi-
cation of victims. In practice, it can be difficult to make a distinction between illegal migrants and 
victims of human trafficking. The procedure for identifying victims should be the same everywhere. 
That calls for coordination and cooperation. Furthermore, agencies involved in the identification 
of victims, such as the police, the immigration service and the labour inspectorate require specific 
training.

Sharing best practices
I share best practices in one country that increase the effectiveness of anti-trafficking efforts with other 
countries. I do not want to stigmatise any countries. In my view, it is important to visit countries with 
a good record so that I can learn from these good examples and share them with other countries. This 
interaction can make a difference. My reports are a way of sharing information.

Victim-centred approach
It is very important not to address human trafficking only on the basis of criminal law. From my years 
of experience as a pro bono lawyer for women and other vulnerable groups, a victim-centred approach 
to human trafficking is very important to me. I place a lot of emphasis on victims in my position as UN 
Special Rapporteur. My first report, which focused specifically on victims, was well received.

Linking the causes of human trafficking to the Millennium Development Goals
I try to link the causes of human trafficking to the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs). For 
example, the first Millennium Development Goal, eradicating poverty and hunger, is closely related 
to human trafficking, since poverty is a root cause of human trafficking. Poverty makes people vul-
nerable and that increases the risk that they will be exploited. The third Millennium Development 
Goal, on gender equality, is also linked to human trafficking because gender inequality is a cause of 
human trafficking.
By linking the MDGs to human trafficking, countries have become more aware of the causes of human 
trafficking. Because states have accepted obligations based on the MDGs, they can be held accountable 
if they fail to meet them.

The importance of a rapporteur
As UN Special Rapporteur I am able to devote special attention to human trafficking. The UN Human 
Rights Council cannot do everything it would like to do in the field of human rights. The appointment 
of a Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons means that specific attention can be devoted to the 
subject of human trafficking.
My strength as UN Special Rapporteur is that I can report on human trafficking and call on countries to 
undertake action. I can also mobilise all the chain partners and work with them. It is important for the 
Rapporteur to be a representative of the government. The Rapporteur must not be influenced and must 
be entirely independent. You could say the UN Special Rapporteur is placed above the system in order 
to guarantee her independence.



The office of National Rapporteur
17

1.2.2  Anna Korvinus, First National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings  
in the Netherlands27

Anna Korvinus was the first National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings in the Netherlands, making her the first 
independent Rapporteur in the world. She held the position from April 2000 to October 2006. Her reflections on that period 
provide interesting insights into how human trafficking was viewed at that time and give an idea of the challenges she faced 
as the first National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and the results she achieved.

Appointment as the first independent National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings
I was appointed as Rapporteur on 1 April 2000. One of the recommendations made by an EU ministerial 
conference on trafficking in women in 1997 was that countries should appoint national rapporteurs. The 
intention was that they would provide governments with adequate and reliable information and with 
objective advice. The rapporteur therefore had to be independent. In 1999 the Netherlands had not yet 
acted on this recommendation, but the process of implementing the recommendation really took off 
after the D66 political party had submitted questions to the Minister of Justice.
My appointment as Rapporteur on 1 April 2000 was arranged by Minister of Justice Korthals, who was 
the minister responsible for coordinating government policy on human trafficking. The Office of the 
National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings commenced operations on 18 September of that 
year.

Trafficking in human beings or trafficking in women
An important issue for me before deciding whether to accept the appointment as Rapporteur was that 
the scope of my tasks and powers, and particularly the fields of research, had to be clear. In the commu-
nication with the Lower House of Parliament, the article of the criminal code that had, even then, long 
been known as the ‘human trafficking article’ was used as a reference. The ministerial conference in 
1997, which recommended that countries should appoint a national rapporteur, was mainly concerned 
with trafficking in women and children. Moreover, the negotiations in Vienna on the conclusion of 
the UN Convention for the suppression of transnational organised crime and the associated protocol, 
which relates to and refers to human trafficking, were already at an advanced stage. This legislation, 
which the States Parties to the Convention had to follow in amending national legislation, was not 
confined to women, but refers to persons. I therefore felt it was logical that I should be appointed as 
the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings. The Minister agreed with me and informed the 
Lower House of Parliament that a National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings would be ap-
pointed, referring to Article 250a of the Dutch Criminal Code. Although in practice this article applied 
mainly to women in prostitution, in the case of minors it could apply to both boys and girls. It was 
also anticipated that the article of Dutch law would be extended to conform with the internationally 
agreed definition.
There was – I learned later – initially some criticism in feminist circles that the new rapporteur would 
focus on human trafficking and not specifically on trafficking in women. They wanted the emphasis 
to be on women as victims, but in view of developments and from an international perspective, it was 
simply better and more orderly, particularly in terms of research and to avoid confusion of terminology, 
to define the area of concern as ‘trafficking in human beings’.

27 The interview was held on 29 April 2010. Ms Korvinus’ valedictory address on 29 September 2006 was 
also incorporated in the interview.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
18

Human trafficking as ‘an issue of public morals’
One aspect of my function as Rapporteur that was difficult in the beginning was that the institution 
was not known. At first, it was still only associated with prostitution. People regarded the subject of 
human trafficking in very narrow terms. It was treated a little disparagingly. Victims were seen as women 
who had brought it on themselves to a certain extent. There was a lot of prejudice. It was also felt to 
be purely a ‘public morals issue’, in the sense of a departure from good moral standards. People felt it 
was exaggerated to appoint a rapporteur specifically for this subject. The perception was lacking that 
human trafficking was connected with organised crime, and often transnational crime, and was a highly 
profitable branch of crime.

The public prosecution service treated human trafficking as an offence against public morals. When I 
wanted to discuss the subject of human trafficking with the Council of Procurators General, one of them 
said, ‘Which portfolio does human trafficking fall under? Public morals or organised crime?’ I replied, 
‘Both.’ I felt it was important for human trafficking to be addressed not only as a public morals issue but 
also in the context of the fight against organised crime. When it was solely a matter for the vice squad, 
cases of human trafficking were usually only discovered by chance. After all, there was already a policy 
of tolerance towards operators in the prostitution business at that time and the police were not actively 
looking for human trafficking. From time to time they might discover a victim of human trafficking. This 
was also partly due to the fact that the vice teams were small and had few resources. They did not have 
sufficient manpower to address human trafficking on a structural basis.

From the perspective of victim support, this view was initially seen as a deterioration of the situation 
for victims, so I had to operate delicately. Victims should be helped, but repression is also needed if you 
want a structural solution.

Women are victims, men are offenders
In November 2002, I attended a UN meeting on human trafficking outside New York. During the 
meeting I remarked that men could also be victims and that women could be perpetrators. At 
first everyone attacked me for saying this, since surely women could not be perpetrators. They 
actually found it shocking. I was initially regarded suspiciously for this remark, but was later 
proved right.

Human rights
One of the most important challenges was to have human trafficking seen in the context of a violation 
of human rights. I repeatedly pointed out that even with enforcement under criminal law the key was 
protection of human rights and that it could not be regarded as a government activity separate from 
that. The argument that I consistently made was that a government that failed to adequately support 
the criminalisation of human trafficking, through intensive enforcement in practice and by making ef-
forts to prevent it, not only harmed the interests of the individual victims but also undermined public 
confidence in the value of the protection of human dignity as a foundation of internationally accepted 
human rights and fundamental freedoms.

Long legislative process
I do feel that it took the Netherlands a very long time to bring its legislation into line with the UN Pa-
lermo Protocol, which the Netherlands signed in 2000. It is a pity that it took until 1 January 2005. It 
therefore took longer to build public support in the Netherlands. It is also more difficult to win public 



The office of National Rapporteur
19

support for legislation that is based on international conventions than for legislation that is adopted in 
response to direct calls from the society itself. If it had been left solely to the Netherlands, I do not think 
the expansion of the human trafficking article to cover other forms of exploitation would have occurred. 
People didn’t realise, and often probably still do not, that exploitation also occurred and still occurs in 
other sectors in the Netherlands.

The importance of a Rapporteur
The importance of appointing a Rapporteur was that it increased attention for this special offence and 
highlighted the subject of human trafficking and efforts to combat it for the police, the public prosecu-
tion service, politicians and the general public. There is certainly greater ‘public awareness’ of human 
trafficking. The importance of catching the perpetrators in this sector has also been highlighted.
The victim support organisations realised the importance of a Rapporteur from the very beginning. I 
have always had enormous admiration for the people who work in these organisations. It is they who 
see the distress of clients most immediately. I was amazed that they did not become disheartened.
When I left office, the person who spoke on behalf of the social services clearly articulated the growing 
realisation in the social services of the need to do more to deal with perpetrators. Because of my back-
ground in the public prosecution service, they thought that I focused too much on catching perpetrators. 
It is to the credit of the social services that they can certainly also see the bigger picture.
On the other hand, the police and the public prosecution service have become more aware of the inte-
rests of victims. More intensive contacts between the police and the social services have helped in this. 
They also have a greater understanding of each other’s roles.

1.2.3  Johanna Suurpää, first Finnish National Rapporteur on Trafficking  
in Human Beings

Johanna Suurpää was appointed as Finland’s first independent National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 
in 2009. She worked as Rapporteur for a year and was succeeded in the middle of 2010 by Eva Biaudet. At the time of 
writing, Johanna Suurpää was the most recently appointed independent Rapporteur, so it is interesting to learn of the 
challenges she faced nine years after the appointment of the first independent National Rapporteur on Trafficking in 
Human Beings.

Appointment as Finland’s first independent National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings
When the decision was taken to appoint an independent Rapporteur in Finland,28 the authorities first 
considered establishing the position as part of an existing organisation. The most important criterion 
was that the Rapporteur should be assigned to an independent government organisation. The Om-
budsman for Minorities met that criterion. Since I was the Ombudsman for Minorities at that time, I 
was appointed as the first National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings in Finland. My mandate 
was actually formulated fairly broadly. It refers to both human trafficking and to related subjects such as 
pimping and certain serious forms of discrimination. In addition to publishing reports, it is important 
for the Rapporteur to build up a good network and to concentrate on the implementation of interna-
tional legislation.

28 The decision to appoint a National Rapporteur of Trafficking in Human Beings was made on the basis 
of a recommendation by the Finnish Coordination Committee on Trafficking in Human Beings (chaired 
by the Ministry of the Interior) to the Finnish government.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
20

Early period as Rapporteur
At the time that I became the Rapporteur in 2009, there was already a certain degree of understanding 
of human trafficking. To say the least, there was a growing interest in the subject. There was a growing 
awareness that human trafficking also occurred in Finland, that it was not something that only happe-
ned in other countries. There was a willingness among chain partners to cooperate with other partners 
and with the Rapporteur. Although not a lot was known about human trafficking, understanding of 
the phenomenon was increasing. The appointment of an independent Rapporteur was well received.

Challenges facing Finland’s first national rapporteur
One of my greatest challenges was that I had a good and broad mandate but few resources. Apart from 
the Rapporteur, there was only one staff member. The limited resources could have undermined the 
office’s credibility, but although the office only consisted of two people, the Rapporteur’s views were 
well received in Finland.

Another challenge was to gather information for my reports. Formally speaking, that was not a problem, 
since I had been given a broad statutory mandate. In practice, however, it proved difficult to secure 
information in time, for example about investigations. Because the police force has a regional struc-
ture, it was difficult to exercise my legal mandate in the various police regions. To do so, I had to create 
a network. I also had to negotiate with the police and labour inspectorate on the timely provision of 
information. That took time.

The importance of a Rapporteur
The first thing I want to stress is that to have any added value, a Rapporteur must be independent. That 
is an absolute precondition. In my view, the added value of a Rapporteur lies in providing an objective 
analysis of how human trafficking is being addressed. The Rapporteur can expose bottlenecks and make 
recommendations for resolving them. The Rapporteur collects all the relevant information from the 
different agencies and explores ways of advancing the fight against human trafficking.

Although I was the Rapporteur for only a year, we still accomplished a number of things. I devoted a lot of 
energy to cooperation in the chain. A positive factor was that everyone showed a willingness to cooperate 
with the National Rapporteur. I am also proud of my first recommendation, in which I called for every 
victim of human trafficking to have access to unlimited legal assistance, not only during the criminal 
proceedings against the human trafficker but also during other legal proceedings, such as proceedings 
to secure a residence permit or civil proceedings for victims who have children. My recommendation 
has led to practical changes in Finland.

1.3	 A	look	into	the	future

These interviews show that the mandates of the Dutch and Finnish National Rapporteurs on Trafficking 
in Human Beings are largely similar. Both agencies report independently on efforts to tackle human 
trafficking in their country. Both agencies also stress the importance of being independent in order to 
carry out their tasks. One of the challenges facing them, which is also mentioned by the UN Rapporteur, 
is that of acquiring reliable data. The exchange of information at the international level also remains 
very important in view of the often transnational nature of human trafficking.



The office of National Rapporteur
21

In addition to reporting obligations under various UN human rights conventions,NRM7 the establish-
ment of the Group of Experts on Action Against Trafficking in Human Beings (GRETA) pursuant to the 
Council of Europe’s Convention on Action against Human Trafficking29 also means that states have to 
report on their current efforts to tackle human trafficking at a national level. The European Commis-
sion’s draft of an EU directive on human trafficking also contains a provision that will require member 
states to provide information to the Commission about efforts to tackle human trafficking. According 
to the draft, the Commission will use the information to prepare a report for the European Parliament 
and the European Council.30 Although the directive has not yet been adopted, it is expected to assign 
an important role to the proposed Anti-Trafficking Coordinator. These developments further underline 
the importance of monitoring.

In June 2010, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Luis CdeBaca, Ambassador-at-Large of the 
Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons, presented the US State Department’s tenth 
annual Trafficking in Persons Report. This report is prescribed by the US Trafficking Victims Protection Act 
of 2000 and is intended to encourage countries to intensify efforts to tackle human trafficking. The 
report describes the situation in more than 170 countries, dividing countries into different catego-
ries known as ‘tiers’. Tier 3 is the lowest category; tier 1 the highest. The Netherlands was assigned 
to tier 1 for the tenth time.31 For the first time, the report also contained an evaluation of measures 
taken to address human trafficking in the United States itself (which is also categorised as tier 1).

Recent expansion of the Dutch Rapporteur’s mandate to include child pornography
The mandate of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings was extended on 1 October 
2009 to include reporting on efforts to address child pornography. From 2011, the Rapporteur will also 
report on the nature and scale of child pornography in the Netherlands. This development was dictated 
by a widespread sense of urgency after various organisations had observed an increase in the volume 
of digital images of sexually abused children. Various agencies had called for the creation of a ‘national 
authority’ and proposed that the investigation or monitoring of efforts to combat child pornography 
could be added to the responsibilities of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings.32 

29 The Group of Experts on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings consists of independent experts who moni-
tor the implementation of the convention by the parties to it and write a report identifying problems. 
On the basis of GRETA’s report, the Committee of the Parties makes recommendations to a state. The 
convention does not provide for a procedure to compel the implementation of recommendations.

30 Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on preventing and combating trafficking in human 
beings, and protecting victims, repealing Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA, 29 March 2010, COM(2010)95 final, 
2010/0065 (COD), Article 19 section 2.

31 US Department of State (2010).  Trafficking in Persons Report 2010, pp. 248-249. Available at http://www.
state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2010/.

32 See, for example, the Programme to Improve Efforts to Combat Child Pornography of the Natio-
nal Police Services Agency (KLPD), available at www.tweedekamer.nl/images/31700H06VI0114bijl
age01_118-193870.pdf; Parliamentary Documents II 2007/08, 31 200 VI, no 35; Amended motion by the 
members De Pater-van der Meer and Arib; positions of Stichting Kinderporno op Internet and ECPAT 
Nederland, available at http://www.meldpunt-kinderporno.nl/files/Biblio/AO%20Kinderporno%20
10%20december.pdf. 



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
22

A similar idea has actually existed since the appointment of the first National Rapporteur on Trafficking 
in Human Beings in 2000.33

The national monitoring of child pornography is an extension of the current responsibilities of the Nati-
onal Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings. Child pornography regularly contains elements – such 
as sexual exploitation and coercion – that fall within the definition of human trafficking.
A similar relationship between child pornography and human trafficking also follows from the Council 
of Europe’s Convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse (Lan-
zarote Convention).34 In addition to the – often – transnational nature of these offences, information 
and communication technology (ICT) plays an increasingly important role. In both human trafficking 
and child pornography ICT can be used to target children (grooming on chat sites and/or by mobile 
phones)35 or for blackmail (with compromising photographs) or for distribution or sale. The internet can 
therefore also constitute an environment for human trafficking. One example of this is forced webcam 
sex. There is also a growing overlap in the conduct of people engaged in human trafficking and child 
pornography.
The concerns about these effects of information and communication technology on child pornography 
and human trafficking are shared at international, European and national level.
The Rapporteur will publish a separate report on child pornography. The first report of child porno-
graphy will probably be published in the first half of 2011.

33 NRM1, p. 35.
34 Bulletin of Treaties 2008, 58.
35 The Hague District Court, 7 May 2010, LJN: BM3656.



2	 Recommendations	and	developments

2.1	 Introduction
This chapter reviews the results of the work of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 
in the ten years since the position was created in the Netherlands. It describes the recommendations 
made by the Rapporteur on some important topics and what has been done in response to them. This 
review gives an impression of the issues that have arisen in relation to efforts to combat human traf-
ficking in the last 10 years, the attempts that have been made to find solutions for those problems, and 
the role played by the Rapporteur in that process. This report is not intended to present a complete 
picture, but rather to give some idea of how an independent rapporteur can help to improve policies 
relating to human trafficking. It was decided to focus on the Rapporteur’s recommendations because, 
although it is certainly not the only instrument with which the Rapporteur can exert influence, it is the 
most prominent. The Rapporteur can use the expertise and information that has been accumulated over 
the years to draw attention to specific subjects, accelerate changes, promote good practices, expose bot-
tlenecks, make suggestions and, occasionally, actually intervene in an individual case. In this context, 
making a recommendation sends a powerful signal, even though its actual effect on policy is not always 
directly measurable in practice.

From the very beginning, the Rapporteur has made recommendations on subjects that include legis-
lation, immigration policy, the position of and help for victims, investigation, the prosecution and 
trial of offenders, administrative enforcement, awareness and identification of victims, registration, 
international cooperation and prevention. Many of these recommendations, all of them covered by the 
three Ps (protection, prevention and prosecution), together with the additional Ps (punishment and 
partnership), have been endorsed by the government, and have led, directly or indirectly, to improve-
ments in policy. The National Action Plan on Human Trafficking (NAP)1 performed an important role in 
that context. In the action plan, the government formulated Dutch policy on combating human traf-
ficking, adopting many of the recommendations made in the Rapporteur’s Third report, and attaching 
practical measures to implement some of them. In February 2006, the action plan was supplemented 
with additional measures relating mainly to underage victims.2 Another important actor is the Task Force 
on Human Trafficking, which was established in 2008 in response to a recommendation by the Rappor-
teur. The task force is composed of representatives of some of the key organisations in the fight against 
human trafficking, including the police, the public prosecution service, the judiciary, the ministries 

1 The National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, Parliamentary Documents II 2004/05, 28 638, no. 13.
2 Additional measures to the National Action Plan on Human Trafficking (Parliamentary Documents II 

2005/06, 28 638, no. 19), pp. 4 and 8-9.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
24

most closely concerned with the problem and officials from a number of large cities. The Rapporteur 
is also a member, although without executive responsibilities, and plays a critical role with respect to 
the task force. The Rapporteur has consistently called for the involvement of NGOs in the task force: 
CoMensha attends its meetings and a formal membership is intended. The task force is responsible 
for identifying bottlenecks, removing obstacles to the effective implementation of the anti-trafficking 
policy through targeted interventions and promoting experiments with new techniques. Some of the 
task force’s action points, formulated as ‘quick wins’, reflect some of the more recent recommendations 
by the Rapporteur. 3 The Minister of Justice has published a reaction (also on behalf of other relevant 
ministers and secretaries) to the Seventh report. Following the fall of the government, this reaction was 
placed on the list of subjects that the Lower House of Parliament declared controversial in connection 
with the government’s caretaker status. Consequently, the planned debate on the report between the 
government and parliament was cancelled.

This chapter covers the following subjects: developments in legislation; international developments; 
help for victims, immigration law; the chain approach; investigation and enforcement; identification; 
awareness and training; suspects and offenders; and prosecution and trial.
The developments in efforts to tackle human trafficking will be outlined on the basis of the recommen-
dations the Rapporteur has made since the First report. A subject that is not covered is human trafficking 
with a view to organ removal. The Fifth and Seventh reports included information about trends and 
developments with respect to this form of human trafficking, but did not contain any recommendati-
ons relating to the situation in the Netherlands. Furthermore, no significant changes have occurred in 
the situation as described in the earlier reports. The Rapporteur will continue to monitor this form of 
human trafficking very closely.

2.2	 Legislation

2.2.1 Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code
In the First report, the Rapporteur said that the definition of human trafficking in the UN Protocol 
(2000) was a broad definition that covered not only exploitation in prostitution or other types of sexual 
services (as was the case with Article 250a of the Dutch Criminal Code, which was the human trafficking 
provision that applied at that time in the Netherlands) but also embraced other forms of exploitation, 
such as forced labour or labour under such conditions that one could refer to it as modern slavery.4 Given 
the obligation to criminalise all phenomena that could be defined as human trafficking – including the 
forced removal of organs – the human trafficking article that applied at that time should be amended, 
the Rapporteur said.5 That had not yet been done when the Third report was published, prompting the 
Rapporteur to stress that Dutch criminal law should be brought into line as soon as possible with the 
internationally accepted basic principles and requirements laid down in the UN Convention against 
Transnational Organised Crime, the associated UN Protocol on Trafficking in Persons and the EU Frame-

3 Task Force on Human Trafficking, 2009b.
4 Protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in human beings, especially women and children, 

supplementing the United Nations Convention against transnational organised crime (New York, 15 
November 2000). Bulletin of Treaties 2001, 69 and 2004, 35

5 NRM1, recommendation 2. 



Recommendations and developments
25

work Decision on Combating Trafficking in Human Beings, which had by that time (in 2002) entered 
into force.6 The report called on parliament to show urgency in passing the bill to expand the definition 
of human trafficking.7

The new human trafficking provision, Article 273a of the Dutch Criminal Code, entered into force on 1 
January 2005. (In September 2006, it was renumbered as Article 273f, without substantive amendment.) 
In contrast to the former Article 250a, which was included under the title ‘Serious Offences against Pu-
blic Morals’, the new article was inserted in the criminal code under the title ‘Serious Offences against 
Personal Liberty’, thus emphasising the fact that the conduct was punishable not because of the sector 
in which the exploitation took place but because the exploitation constituted a violation of the victim’s 
personal liberty. This implemented recommendation 4 in the First report.
Article 273f replaced the former Article 250a of the Dutch Criminal Code, in which only human trafficking 
in the sense of exploitation in the sex industry was made a criminal offence. It incorporated the terms of 
the former Article 250a of the Dutch Criminal Code8  – albeit not verbatim – so that the further interpre-
tation in the case-law of what constituted criminal behaviour remained valid under the new provision. 
The new provision marked a significant expansion of the conduct that was made punishable as human 
trafficking to include, in addition to sexual exploitation, other forms of exploitation in the area of work 
and services and the forced removal of organs.

2.2.2  Exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry  
(‘other forms of exploitation’)

It was not known at the time of the introduction of the new human trafficking article whether there was 
a genuine social need to criminalise exploitation outside the sex industry. Neither researchers nor the 
investigative services knew the scale of its existence in the Netherlands, although a survey of the litera-
ture by Van der Leun and Vervoorn9 did indicate a growing risk. The Office of the National Rapporteur 
on Trafficking in Human Beings (BNRM) therefore carried out an exploratory study designed to collect 
case studies on grave abuses in working situations.NRM5 Many people in the Netherlands regard slavery 
as a thing of the past, but the case studies collected by BNRM painted a different picture. Other forms 
of exploitation do occur in the Netherlands, although it was not – and is still not – possible to conclude 
on what scale.NRM5, NRM7

The entry into force of the new human trafficking article did not establish where reprehensible working 
conditions become exploitation that falls under Article 273f (2) of the Dutch Criminal Code. The legis-
lature had left it partially to the courts to determine the precise scope of the new provision, but as long 
as there was very little case-law on this point it was difficult to investigate and prosecute other forms of 
exploitation. The Netherlands was not the only country to face difficulties in precisely defining the term 
‘exploitation’ and the associated means of coercion. In February 2009, the University of Utrecht and 
BNRM organised an international conference10 devoted to other forms of exploitation. The pretext for 

6 Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA, 19 July 2002, (OJ 2002, L 203/1).
7 NRM3, recommendation 1.
8 Parliamentary Documents II 2003/04, 29 291, no. 3, p. 13 (Explanatory Memorandum). 
9 Van der Leun and Vervoorn (2004).
10 Conference ‘Human Trafficking, turning our attention to labour exploitation’, 13 February 2009. A 

lengthy summary of the conference proceedings is available at www.bnrm.nl. 



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
26

this conference was a study by Coster van Voorhout,11 which had shown that other countries encountered 
similar problems in determining the scope of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry (‘other 
forms of exploitation’).12 One of the findings to emerge from the conference was the enormous uncer-
tainty that still exists concerning the boundary between poor employment practices and exploitation. 
Uncertainties about the definition and scope of the means of coercion ‘abuse of a vulnerable position’ 
also played a role in the case-law.NRM7

The Rapporteur had said in the Third report that the legislature should more clearly define the term 
‘exploitation’ in relation to working situations outside the sex industry and not leave it solely to the 
courts.13 It is now five years since the human trafficking article was expanded, and although there were 
initially few prosecutions for other forms of exploitation, the number of cases brought before the courts 
has risen steadily. The interpretation of the definition of the offence is also becoming clearer. In the 
so-called ‘Chinese restaurant case’, the Supreme Court gave clear definitions of the means of coercion 
‘abuse of a vulnerable position’ and ‘abuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs’.14 In that 
judgment, the Supreme Court also provided guidance on the interpretation of ‘exploitation’, or the in-
tention to exploit, as an element of the offence. The number of prosecutions and convictions for other 
forms of exploitation has risen steeply in the Netherlands since the Supreme Court’s judgment.15 That 
judgment, and the later case-law, has confirmed that the scope of the prohibition on human trafficking 
for the purpose of other forms of exploitation is becoming steadily clearer.16

That the term ‘exploitation’ is being further defined by case-law has also become apparent from a number 
of convictions for exploitation in crime.17 Although this form of exploitation is not explicitly mentioned 
in the law or in the explanatory memorandum, the courts have had no difficulty in also finding that this 
form of exploitation falls under the definition of the offence in Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code.

2.2.3  Prostitution policy and efforts to combat human trafficking
There has always been a clear relationship between human trafficking and prostitution in the Nether-
lands. Human trafficking has been associated with prostitution ever since it was included in Dutch cri-
minal law.NRM1, 18

The ban on brothels was removed from the Dutch Criminal Code on 1 October 2000, the same year as 
the office of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings was established. The purpose of 
that amendment was to decriminalise the exploitation of prostitution and so legalise a situation that 
was already tolerated. ‘The existence of prostitution is a fact, even for the government. That calls for a 

11 Coster van Voorhout, J. (2009).
12 See also NRM7, section 12.4.3 for a comparative international survey.
13 NRM3, recommendation 3.
14 Supreme Court, 27 October 2010, LJN: BI7099. For a discussion of this judgment, see § 2.8.5.
15 See also § 2.8.5.
16 See also NRM6, pp. 1-2 and NRM7, pp. 494-521.
17 See: The Hague District Court, 21 November 2006, LJN: AZ2707; Rotterdam District Court, 5 July 2007 

(not published); Haarlem District Court, 22 April 2009, LJN: BI3519; The Hague District Court, 17 Febru-
ary 2010, LJN: BL4298; The Hague District Court, 18 March 2010, LJN: BL8022; Dordrecht District Court, 
20 April 2010, LJN: BM1743.

18 For a discussion of need, usefulness and possibility of regulating or legalising prostitution, see, for 
example, Vermeulen (2007).



Recommendations and developments
27

realistic approach, without moralising’, said the Minister of Justice in the explanatory memorandum to 
the amendment.19 One of the most important objectives of the bill was to prevent and combat human 
trafficking.20 From this perspective, the Rapporteur made recommendations on a number of aspects of 
prostitution policy.

During the parliamentary debate on the abolition of the ban on brothels, the question was raised of 
whether the (categorical) prohibition on issuing work permits for work in the sex industry in the Foreign 
Nationals (Employment) Act Implementing Decree could be maintained.NRM1 In the Third report, the 
Rapporteur said that greater certainty was needed about the course the government proposed taking 
in that regard.21 To prevent human trafficking or to make it easier to identify, the Rapporteur said the 
government should also clarify its intentions in the longer term with respect to opening up the sex sector 
in the Dutch labour market for new EU nationals, for the purposes of salaried employment. ‘After all, a 
lack of clarity (about conditions and possibilities) is not generally conducive to combating human traf-
ficking, but an excessively intricate system of conditions (such as those for the self-employed) might also 
be counterproductive because of dependence on third parties that may arise as a result.’22

It has since become clear that the general ban on issuing work permits for prostitutes from outside 
the EU – including prostitutes from Romania and Bulgaria (countries for which the free movement 
of workers does not yet apply) will be maintained. The government has announced that the Labour 
Inspectorate will make available capacity for integrated enforcement actions in the prostitution sector 
instigated by municipalities. The inspectors will also be on the lookout for signs of human trafficking 
during investigations of illegal employment.23

Act on the regulation of prostitution
When the ban on brothels was lifted in 2000, it was decided to adopt a system of local regulation of legal 
prostitution businesses, with local authorities granting licences containing conditions. The Rapporteur 
had already said in the First report that, although the benefit of decentralised regulation is that it leaves 
room for local policy, diversity of policy would also increase the need for harmonisation of rules and 
procedures. This is a particularly pressing problem where differences in policy could create the risk of 
cases of human trafficking occurring not being addressed.24 In the Fifth report, the Rapporteur recom-
mended that the legislature should develop a national framework for prostitution policy, the basic prin-
ciple being that every municipality must lay down rules for all establishments where commercial sexual 
transactions are carried on.25 In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur stressed the importance of laying 

19 Parliamentary Documents 1996/97, 25 437, no. 3; see also § 2.6.1.
20 The amendment had several purposes. Six main objectives were formulated: 1. Controlling and regu-

lating the exploitation of prostitution, 2. Improving efforts to combat the exploitation of involuntary 
prostitution, 3. Protecting underage persons against sexual abuse, 4. Protecting the position of pros-
titutes, 5. Disentangling prostitution and the criminal milieu, and 6. Reducing the number of illegal 
immigrants in prostitution. See NRM1, p. 15 et seq.

21 NRM3, recommendation 6.
22 NRM3, recommendation 7.
23 NRM7, p.28.
24 NRM1, recommendation 23. See also § 2.6.1.
25 Or where commercial facilities are provided for such transactions to be performed with or for a third 

party, NRM5, recommendation 2.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
28

down rules in the Act on the Regulation of Prostitution to harmonise policy in the municipalities to 
prevent the so-called waterbed effect.26

In November 2009, the bill containing Rules on the regulation of prostitution and on combating abu-
ses in the sex industry (Act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry) appeared.27 
According to the explanatory memorandum, ‘The bill is intended to create the most comprehensive 
possible administrative system that by regulating the sector can improve efforts to address abuses in 
the sex industry, provide better protection for prostitutes and provide better support for combating 
human trafficking, prostitution by minors and forced prostitution through criminal law. Accordingly, 
the proposed legislation creates the framework for a robust approach to abuses in the sex industry’.28 
Contrary to what the title suggests, however, the bill is mainly concerned with regulating prostitution 
and sex businesses. In his memorandum in response to the report, the Minister said on this point that 
‘naturally the background to the bill is the concern about abuses, but tackling them is not the primary 
objective of the bill.’29

In December 2009, parliament’s permanent committees for Home Affairs and Kingdom Relations 
and for Justice invited a number of civil-society organisations to a meeting to discuss the proposed 
bill. The National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings took this opportunity to reiterate a 
number of points.
The Rapporteur said that the current bill still failed to provide sufficient guarantees for effective 
measures against human trafficking.30 These comments concerned the lack of uniformity in the 
rules on issuing licences and the conditions to be attached to them; supervision and enforcement; 
the registration of sex workers and the criminalisation of prostitutes. The Rapporteur also addressed 
the question of whether the minimum age for working in prostitution should be raised to 21, but 
said it was not possible to properly anticipate the effects of raising the minimum age for working in 
prostitution, partly because not enough is known about illegal prostitution. To prevent raising the 
minimum age from leading to more young people working illegally in prostitution, the Rapporteur 
said that it was first necessary to learn more about the world of illegal prostitution and to address it 
more effectively. The Rapporteur therefore recommended first investigating what improvements the 
changes in the rules governing sex-related businesses had yielded in this regard before possibly rai-
sing the age limit. The Rapporteur therefore suggested that the first evaluation of the act (Article 39) 
should also investigate the age of sex workers who are working illegally and who are forced to work.

26 NRM7, recommendation 1.
27 Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 32 211, no. 1-2.
28 Rules on the regulation of prostitution and on combating abuses in the sex industry (Act to regulate 

prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry), Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 32 211, no. 3, p. 
3-4.

29 Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 32 211, no. 8, p. 3.
30 Input by the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings to the roundtable discussion on 

the Act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry, letter from the Rapporteur to 
the members of parliament’s Permanent Committee for Home Affairs and Kingdom Relations and 
Permanent Committee for Justice, 11 December 2009. The letter from the Rapporteur to the Minister 
of the Interior and Kingdom Relations of 21 January 2009 in response to the draft bill was attached to 
this letter, see NRM7 p. 48 et seq. and Appendix 5.



Recommendations and developments
29

The Third report contained a recommendation to start a broad debate on the question of whether it 
should be a criminal offence to consciously buy sexual services from a person who is obviously being 
forced to provide them.31 The recommendation said that the discussion should address the desirability 
and practical enforceability of such criminalisation. The question is still valid, particularly in connection 
with the current legislative proposal.32

In the government’s general reaction to the Seventh report on human trafficking, the Minister of Jus-
tice said that he expected that the Act on the regulation of prostitution and combating abuses in the 
sex industry would make it easier for public authorities and law enforcement agencies to prevent and 
suppress abuses in prostitution. The Minister also noted that the recommendations concerned with the 
supervision of the prostitution sector had already been adopted in the existing bill.33

The Rapporteur replied to the government’s reaction by repeating the concerns she had expressed 
during the roundtable discussion of the Act on the regulation of prostitution on 15 December 2009. 
The bill says nothing about a duty on the part of the authorities to make best efforts or about the al-
location of tasks between the local authority and the police. The explanatory memorandum to the act 
states that it is not usual for a law to include a provision requiring the local law enforcement triumvirate 
(the mayor of a municipality, the chief public prosecutor and the chief superintendent of police) to 
make agreements on supervision and enforcement and therefore no such provision was included in 
the bill. This omission increases the risk that the rules laid down in the law will not be supervised and 
enforced adequately.34

Accordingly, the Rapporteur disagreed with the Minister’s view that the Act on the regulation of pros-
titution would strengthen supervision and enforcement, unless it prescribed obligations to make best 
efforts to do so. The findings in the Police Monitor 2008 confirmed that supervision and enforcement in 
the prostitution sector are particularly weak elements in efforts to tackle human trafficking.

The report by the Lower House of Parliament35 subsequently caused the Minister of Justice (who is also 
acting Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations) to amend the bill in some respects. For example, 
the allocation of tasks between local authorities and the police is further clarified in the bill; municipa-
lities can no longer assign their supervisory duties to the police, although the police will remain ‘closely 
involved’ and there will ‘ideally be integrated enforcement’. The Minister has also proposed raising 
the minimum age for prostitution to 21.36 It is also now the intention to register prostitutes in a small 
number of municipalities, at which time an intake interview will be mandatory. Victims of human traf-

31 NRM3, recommendation 9.
32 For more on this subject, see § 2.7.3.
33 Letter from the Minister of Justice, Reaction to the Seventh Report of the National Rapporteur on 

Trafficking in Human Beings, 21 January 2010, Parliamentary Documents 2009-2010, 28 638, no. 47. The 
Minister of Justice replied also on behalf of the State Secretary for Justice, the Minister of the Interior 
and Kingdom Relations, the Minister of Social Affairs and Employment, the Minister for Youth and 
Family and the State Secretary for Health.

34 Letter from the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings to parliament’s Permanent Com-
mittee for Justice regarding the government’s reaction to the Seventh Report on Trafficking in Human 
Beings, 10 February 2010.

35 Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, no. 5.
36 Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 32 211, no. 9; Memorandum of amendment; Agema amendment, rai-

sing the age for prostitution from 18 to 21, Parliamentary Documents II 2009/10, 32 211, no. 6.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
30

ficking will not be prosecuted for working without being registered; the details of this have still to be 
worked out. The possibility of making arrangements to allow authorities to enquire whether licences 
have been denied will also be explored.
If the minimum age for working as a prostitute is raised to 21, it is a subject that should receive special 
attention during the periodic evaluations of the Act on the Regulation of Prostitution. It is not self-
evident – as the memorandum in response to the report seems to assume – that the study into the 
effects of raising the age should then fall within the remit of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in 
Human Beings.

2.2.4 Maximum sentences
From 1 January 2005, the maximum sentence for human trafficking without aggravating circumstances 
was six years’ imprisonment. The maximum prison sentences for aggravated human trafficking were 
eight, 10 and 12 years, and – if the offence led to the death of the victim – 15 years. Since 1 July 2009, the 
maximum prison sentence for all aggravated forms of human trafficking has been at least 12 years.37 
Consequently, offenders can be held in pre-trial detention on the basis of the so-called ‘12-year ground’, 
which represents a significant expansion of the possibilities of remanding a person in custody. In the 
Fifth report, the Rapporteur observed that the sentence for the basic offence, at least, which was then six 
years, could be described as lenient in comparison with other offences of a similar nature and serious-
ness.38 The raising of the maximum prison sentence for non-aggravated forms of human trafficking to 
eight years also makes it possible to bring a prosecution for preparation to commit the offence (Article 
46 of the Dutch Criminal Code).NRM7

The aggravating circumstance based on the age of sexual majority (which is 16 in the Netherlands) is 
irrelevant for human trafficking, in the sex industry or elsewhere. In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur 
recommended raising the age of sexual majority creating an aggravating circumstance in Article 273f (3)
(2) of the Dutch Criminal Code to 18.39 Various children’s rights organisations had already recommen-
ded extending the aggravating circumstance in the human trafficking provision with respect to sexual 
exploitation to all minors.NRM7 In October 2009, the Minister of Justice40 said in response to the Annual 
Report on Children’s Rights41 that negotiations are currently underway in Brussels on new EU legislation 
relating to human trafficking. The Minister also said that the Netherlands supports the provision in the 
draft legislation that would make all forms of human trafficking committed against a child (every person 

37 The specific changes are as follows: in the first section (non-aggravated forms of human trafficking) the 
maximum term of imprisonment was raised from six to eight years; in the third section (human traf-
ficking performed by two or more persons acting in concert or human trafficking committed against 
a victim under the age of 16) the maximum term of imprisonment was raised from eight to 12 years; in 
the fifth section (human trafficking resulting in serious physical injury or threatening the life of ano-
ther person) the maximum term of imprisonment was raised from 12 to 15 years; in the sixth section 
(human trafficking leading to the death of another person) the maximum term of imprisonment was 
raised from 15 to 18 years.

38 The Rapporteur had also pointed out in this context that the level of the sentence also has consequen-
ces for the possibilities of applying pre-trial detention, NRM5, p. 20.level of 

39 NRM7, recommendation 2.
40 Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 31 001, no.76.
41 Defence for Children-ECPAT and UNICEF, Annual Report on Children’s Rights 2009.



Recommendations and developments
31

under the age of 18) grounds for a heavier sentence42 and that implementation of the new legislation 
would probably lead to an amendment of Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code.43 At the time of wri-
ting, the EU directive has not yet been finally adopted.

2.3	 International	developments
Many of the measures taken to address human trafficking at the national level are a reaction to inter-
national instruments and treaties.NRM1 Combating human trafficking is a high priority for numerous 
international governmental organisations, including the United Nations (UN), the European Union, the 
Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). The measures 
proposed embrace what can be summed up as the three Ps (Prevention, Protection and Prosecution), 
to which list can be added two more Ps (Partnership44 and Punishment).
A number of binding UN and EU agreements are particularly relevant for the most recent legislation on 
human trafficking in the Netherlands. They include the UN Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking 
in Persons, especially Women and Children (2000)45 and the EU Framework Decision on combating trafficking in human 
beings (2002).46 These instruments oblige states to make human trafficking a criminal offence and to take 
measures to combat it and encompass every form of exploitation of persons, regardless of the sector in 
which it occurs. The international definition of human trafficking47 now covers not only exploitation 
in prostitution but also other forms of social and economic exploitation and forced organ donation.48

A number of earlier treaties relating to human trafficking, such as the International Convention on the Sup-
pression of Traffic in Women of Full Age (1933), also apply to the Netherlands. This convention obliged states 

42 At that time it was a draft of a new EU Framework Decision on Human Trafficking (see NRM7, p. 435). 
After the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, the European Commission made a new proposal for 
a directive, see § 2.3.5. The draft provision concerning this aggravating circumstance was not amended 
in the new proposal.

43 Letter from the Minister of Justice of 20 October 2009, Lower House of Parliament 2009/10, 31 001 no. 
76, p. 2. 

44 The UN Rapporteur uses the term ‘Promotion of cooperation’. See Report submitted by the Special 
Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially women and children, Joy Ngozi Ezeilo, UN Doc. A/
HRC/10/16, 20 February 2009, pp. 25-26.

45 Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, 
supplementing the United Nations Convention against transnational organised crime (New York, 15 
November 2000), Bulletin of Treaties 2001, 69 and 2004, 35.

46 Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA, 19 July 2002 (OJ L 203/1). For a complete list of relevant internati-
onal legislation, see Implementation of international legislation to combat migrant smuggling and 
human trafficking, Explanatory Memorandum, Parliamentary Documents II 2003/04, 29 291, no. 3, p. 1.

47 In fact, the definitions of human trafficking used in these instruments often differ somewhat. This 
explains in part why the offences criminalised in different countries – under the title of human traffic-
king or otherwise – are not precisely the same. It is also connected with differences in attitudes towards 
prostitution.

48 The Council of Europe and the United Nations published a detailed report on this subject in October 
2009, Trafficking in organs, tissues and cells and trafficking in human beings for the purpose of the 
removal of organs, http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/trafficking/Docs/News/OrganTrafficking_
study.pdf, consulted on 17 June 2010.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
32

to make the procurement of women of full age a criminal offence if it is done for immoral purposes to 
be carried out in another country, ‘even with their approval’.49

However, efforts to combat human trafficking have to be seen in a wider context. There are many other 
treaties concerned with these problems, including, traditionally, the Slavery Convention of 1926, the 
1953 Protocol to that convention and the supplementary Convention of 1956. Human rights treaties 
are also relevant.NRM7 The International Labour Organisation (ILO) has adopted a number of important 
instruments, including the ILO Convention No. 29 on Forced or Compulsory Labour 50(1930) and the ILO Convention 
No. 18251 (1999), which prohibits the most serious forms of child labour. Other, more recent anti-human 
trafficking instruments include the European Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual 
Exploitation and Sexual Abuse (the Lanzarote Convention), which in fact also encompasses child por-
nography.52 Although it is made a criminal offence in the Netherlands under a different provision than 
the human trafficking provision (Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code), child sex tourism is also 
internationally regarded as a form of human trafficking.53

In the very first report, the Rapporteur referred to the fact that human trafficking would continue to 
find a fertile breeding ground as long as the gap between rich and poor countries remained and as long 
as young people found it difficult to make a life for themselves in their own country. The call on the 
government to devote constant and intensive attention to the root causes of international human traf-
ficking was repeated in the Third report. The Rapporteur recommended incorporating factors such as the 
absence of possibilities for work and development, poverty and issues of gender equality more explicitly 
in relation to human trafficking in relations with other countries, including development relationships. 
This idea was expressed in the Action Oriented Paper54 on strengthening the EU external dimension on 
action against trafficking in human beings published at the end of 2009, which called for, among other 
things, greater synergy between policy areas such as foreign relations, development cooperation, social 
affairs, employment, gender equality and good governance.

2.3.1 Ratification of recent human trafficking conventions by the Netherlands
The Rapporteur referred in the First report to the adoption of the UN human trafficking protocol to 
supplement the UN Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (2000) and called in the first 
recommendation for the early ratification of these instruments.55 The protocol is essentially concerned 
with organised crime, but cannot be seen separately from respect for the human rights of suspects and 
victims. In the Third report, the Rapporteur referred to the fact that if ratification was delayed the Nether-

49 Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 1935, 598.
50 Bulletin of Acts, Order and Decrees 1933, 236
51 Bulletin of Treaties 1999, 177
52 Bulletin of Treaties 2008, 58.
53 Resolution 63/156, Trafficking in women and girls, for example, contains recommendations not only on 

tackling human trafficking but also explicitly refers to child sex tourism, UN Doc. A/Res/156, 30 January 
2009. The Trafficking in Persons report, published annually by the United States, also contains information 
about efforts made to combat child sex tourism, which is prosecuted in the Netherlands under Article 
248b or Article 244, in conjunction with Article 5 or 5a, of the Dutch Criminal Code.

54 Action Oriented Paper on strengthening the EU external dimension on action against trafficking in human begins; Towards 
global EU action against trafficking in human beings, Council Document 6865/10.

55 NRM1, recommendation 1.



Recommendations and developments
33

lands would be unable to take advantage of the mechanisms for monitoring and further implementa-
tion that had already been set in motion and the Netherlands would consequently become increasingly 
unable to maintain its pioneering and leading position in the area of combating human trafficking.56 
The Netherlands ratified the protocol for the entire Kingdom on 27 July 2005.

The Council of Europe’s Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings was adopted in 2005. 
The Convention is based on the UN Protocol but applies to all forms of human trafficking, whether nati-
onal or transnational and whether or not connected with organised crime (Article 2). In the Fifth report, 
the Rapporteur called for early ratification of this Convention.57 The Netherlands signed the convention 
on 17 November 2005 but took a long time to ratify it. The main reason was that in the course of the 
ratification process the government decided that it would adopt the maximum scope of protection af-
forded by the Convention and accordingly proposed expanding jurisdiction for the offences defined in 
the Convention in three respects.NRM7 Parliamentary completed its handling of the act of approval last 
autumn,58 the implementing legislation has already taken effect59 and the Convention entered into force 
for the Netherlands on 1 August 2010.60

2.3.2 Human rights approach
The basic principle that human trafficking is a violation of human rights and that states are consequently 
obliged to tackle this phenomenon is now internationally accepted.NRM7 The Netherlands also endorses 
with a human rights approach to combating human trafficking.
The importance of a human rights approach is apparent from the EU Action Plan on Combating Hu-
man Trafficking (2005),61 which, in accordance with the EU Framework Decision (2002), focuses on 
the protection of human rights.62 A human rights approach was also expressed in the UN High Com-
missioner for Human Rights’ Recommended Principles and Guidelines on Human Rights and Human Trafficking 
adopted in 2002.63 Human trafficking is often one of the subjects addressed by the various human rights 
agencies of the UN, which also monitor the legislation and practice in the Netherlands.64 The Council 
of Europe’s Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (2005) also makes a clear link 

56 NRM3, recommendation 1.
57 NRM5, recommendation 1.
58 Act of 24 September 2009 containing approval of the Council of Europe Convention on Action against 

Trafficking in Human Beings, signed in Warsaw on 16 May 2005, Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 2009, 
445. 

59 Act of 26 November 2009 containing a partial amendment of the Criminal Code, the Code of Criminal 
Procedure and several related laws in connection with legal developments, international obligations 
and identified legal flaws and gaps, Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 2009, 525; Decree on its entry into 
force: Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 2010,139.

60 The Netherlands ratified on 22 April 2010, Bulletin of Treaties 2010, 160.
61 EU plan on best practices, standards and procedures for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings, OJ 2005, 

C311, 9 December 2005.
62 Framework Decision on Combating Trafficking in Human Beings, 19 July 2002, L.203/1 (‘Trafficking in 

human beings comprises serious violations of fundamental human rights and human dignity’). 
63 UN Doc. E/2002/68/Add.1. See also Gallagher, 2006.
64 See, for example, Concluding Observations of the Committee on Elimination of Discrimination against Women, The 

Netherlands, UN Doc. CEDAW/C/NLD/CO/5, 5 February 2010, §§ 28-29. See also NRM7, p. 72 et seq.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
34

between human trafficking and human rights. By virtue of these documents, the Netherlands is bound 
by international obligations to protect human rights and, consequently, to combat human trafficking. 
This is why the Rapporteur has previously recommended that the Dutch government should unequivo-
cally declare itself in favour of an approach to tackling human trafficking primarily within the context 
of human rights.65

European Convention on Human Rights
A very relevant provision in this context is Article 4 of the European Convention on Human Rights 
(ECHR), which outlaws slavery, servitude and compulsory labour.66 In the case of Siliadin v. France, the 
European Court of Human Rights ruled in 2005 that the Parties to the Convention are obliged to include 
provisions in their criminal law making these offences punishable, adding that those criminal provisions 
must also be enforced in practice.NRM5 In this case, the Court in Strasbourg ruled that French criminal 
law had failed to afford an underage girl from Togo, who was living illegally in France and working in 
a private household under very poor conditions, with sufficient and effective protection against the 
servitude in which she had been held, as referred to in Article 4 (1) ECHR.67

Case-law of the Court in Strasbourg shows that the ECHR also imposes a number of other positive obli-
gations on states with respect to taking action against human trafficking.68 A recent judgment of the 
Court illustrates this:

European Court of Human Rights, 7 January 2010, Rantsev v. Cyprus and Russia 69

In March 2001, the 20 year-old Russian Oxana Rantseva died under suspicious circumstances that 
were never cleared up after falling from a balcony of an apartment building in Cyprus. She had en-
tered the country on a visa to work as an ‘artiste’ in a cabaret, a sector that is often used as a cover 
for prostitution in Cyprus. Rantseva had left her workplace three days after she started performing 
in a cabaret club in Limassol. Some time later she was found in a discotheque by M.A., the manager 
of the club where she had worked. He took her to the police station and asked the police to place 
her in custody as an illegal alien. Rantseva was detained at the police station and soon afterwards 
M.A. was allowed to collect her since there was no evidence that she was living illegally in Cyprus. 
Later that afternoon she was taken to a room on the sixth floor of an apartment building. Not long 
afterwards she was found dead on the street.
Ranseva’s father brought a complaint to the European Court of Human Rights against both Cyprus 
and Russia, partly on the grounds of Article 4 ECHR, which prohibits slavery and forced labour. The 
Court ruled that Cyprus had violated Article 4 ECHR. It based its decision on two findings. First, the 
court said, Cyprus had failed to create a suitable legal and administrative framework to combat 
human trafficking in light of the existing regime of ‘artiste’ visas. Second, the Cypriot police had 

65 NRM3, recommendation 4.
66 The first two sections of Article 4 of the ECHR read: ‘1. No one shall be held in slavery or servitude. 2. 

No one shall be required to perform forced or compulsory labour.’
67 European Court of Human Rights, 26 July 2005, No. 73316/01. 
68 On this point see, for example, Päivi Hirvelä (Judge at the European Court of Human Rights), ‘The 

States’ positive obligations to protect the victims of human trafficking in the light of ECHR judgments’, 
OSCE Conference ‘Successful Prosecution of Human Trafficking – Challenges and Good Practices’, Hel-
sinki, 10-11 September 2008, http://www.osce.org/documents/cthb/2008/09/32910_en.pdf. 

69 European Court of Human Rights, 7 January 2010, No. 25965/04.



Recommendations and developments
35

failed to take operational measures to protect Rantseva against human trafficking, despite circum-
stances that gave rise to a credible suspicion that she might be a victim. Russia also violated Article 
4 because it had failed to investigate how and where Rantseva was recruited and, more specifically, 
because it took no steps to identify those who were involved in recruiting Rantseva or to investigate 
the methods used to recruit her.

Human trafficking and Article 4 ECHR
The Court found that while Article 4 ECHR does not explicitly mention human trafficking, proscribing 
as it does slavery, servitude and forced labour, the ECHR is a living instrument which must be inter-
preted in the light of present-day conditions. The Court concluded that human trafficking itself runs 
counter to the spirit and the purpose of Article 4 and therefore falls within the scope of that article 
of the Convention. The Court therefore found it unnecessary to decide whether the case involved 
‘slavery’, ‘servitude’ or ‘forced labour’ (consideration 282) and concluded that human trafficking 
within the meaning of Article 3(a) of the UN Palermo Protocol70 and Article 4 of the Council of Europe 
Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings71 falls within the scope of Article 4 ECHR.

Positive obligations
The Court went on to find that human trafficking is not to be regarded as solely a criminal matter and 
recalled that, like Articles 2 and 3 of the Convention, Article 4 enshrines a basic value (consideration 
283). In the Court’s view, in this case Article 4 led not only to the specific positive obligation on States 
to make human trafficking a criminal offence but also the requirement to put in place adequate mea-
sures regulating businesses often used as a cover for human trafficking (consideration 284). National 
legislation must be adequate to ensure the practical and effective protection of the rights of potential 
victims of human trafficking. This also implies that countries must guard against their immigration 
rules being used to encourage, facilitate or tolerate human trafficking (consideration 284). The Court 
discussed at length the system of ‘artiste’ visas in Cyprus, specifically mentioning the problem that ca-
baret managers have to submit the application for an entry visa. This makes the individual concerned 
dependent on her employer or agent and therefore more vulnerable to exploitation. The system also 
makes it difficult for the authorities to prove compulsion and human trafficking and to tackle it ef-
fectively. The Court found that Cyprus had failed in this regard by maintaining the visa arrangement 
for ‘artistes’, doing so, moreover, despite announcing earlier that it would abolish the system.

‘Comprehensive approach’
The Court also noted that the UN Palermo Protocol and the Council of Europe’s Convention refer-
red to the need for a ‘comprehensive approach’ to combat human trafficking, which, in addition 
to measures to punish human traffickers, includes measures to prevent trafficking and to protect 
victims. The extent of the positive obligations arising from Article 4 ECHR has to be seen in this 
wider context (consideration 285). States are, for example, required to provide relevant training for 
law enforcement and immigration officials (consideration 287). Article 4 also contains a procedural 
obligation to investigate situations of potential human trafficking. This duty exists regardless of 

70 Protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children, sup-
plementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (UN Palermo Pro-
tocol), Bulletin of Treaties 2001, 69.

71 Bulletin of Treaties 2006, 99.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
36

whether there is a complaint from a victim or next of kin (consideration 288). The Court found 
that the need for a full and effective investigation encompassing every aspect of human trafficking 
– from recruitment to exploitation – is unquestionable, once again referring to the definition of 
human trafficking in the UN Palermo Protocol and the Council of Europe’s Convention on Action 
against Trafficking in Human Beings. This obligation therefore applied not only to Cyprus as the 
country of destination, but also to Russia, the country where Oxana Rantseva was recruited. Given 
the international nature of human trafficking, states have an obligation to cooperate effectively 
with the relevant authorities in other states in investigations into human trafficking (consideration 
289). States are also obliged to take operational measures to protect victims or potential victims 
against human trafficking. The Court found that such an obligation arises from Article 4 ECHR when 
the authorities are aware or ought to be aware of circumstances giving rise to a credible suspicion 
that a person is exposed to a real and immediate risk of being trafficked (consideration 286).

With this judgment, the Court brought human trafficking within the scope of Article 4 ECHR, which 
prohibits slavery, servitude and forced labour. Apart from the fact that there is limited case-law on this 
provision of the Convention, the judgment is groundbreaking because the Court formulated a number 
of obligations on member states of the Council of Europe relating to actions against human trafficking 
that go beyond investigation and prosecution to include prevention of trafficking, protection of victims 
and international cooperation.72

Preventing ‘collateral damage’
NGOs have referred previously to the fact that measures and policies designed to combat human traf-
ficking can have a negative effect on the people they are intended to protect (‘collateral damage’).NRM7 
Some measures to address human trafficking that may benefit certain groups can also stigmatise or 
restrict the freedom of movement of other groups. The measures taken can also be counter-productive 
with respect to the groups they are designed to protect. That, briefly, is the message of the report entitled 
Collateral Damage: The Impact of Anti-Trafficking Measures around the World, published by the Global Alliance 
Against Traffic in Women (GAATW) in 2007.73 The reason is said to be that states often give precedence to 
national security, fighting crime and guarding national borders against illegal migrants over the rights of 
trafficked persons. It is, in any case, important to take prior account of the impact that measures against 
human trafficking could have on human rights.
In 2004, the first measure proposed in the National Action Plan on Human Trafficking (NAP) was to 
draw up a list of moments when there was a risk of violations of human rights in relation to prevention, 
investigation and prosecution, the protection of victims and – where applicable – repatriation and rein-
tegration.74 No such systematic study has yet been carried out. In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur 
therefore called on the government to develop a strategy for dealing with the effects of measures taken 
to combat human trafficking on human rights for the purposes of a human rights approach, at the same 
time recommending that collateral damage should be avoided as far as possible when implementing 
new policy.75

72 See M. Boot-Matthijssen (2010).
73 GAATW, Collateral Damage: The Impact of Anti-Trafficking Measures on Human Rights around the 

World (2007), www.gaatw.org. 
74 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 1.
75 NRM7, recommendation 47.



Recommendations and developments
37

2.3.3 International cooperation
International cooperation is crucial to efforts to address transnational forms of human trafficking. In 
this context, the Rapporteur stated in the Third report that the Dutch government should declare as a 
matter of principle whether the standard for law enforcement in relation to human trafficking should 
be set higher than the purely national level.76

In the Fifth report, the Rapporteur referred to the importance of initiating or continuing active coope-
ration with prevalent countries of origin of victims (at the time they were Bulgaria, Nigeria, Romania) 
and the need to be alert to countries where the numbers seemed to be increasing. The Rapporteur 
was not only referring to joint action in investigations and prosecutions, but also to coordination of 
the activities of various organisations dedicated to the prevention of human trafficking and, where ap-
propriate, the responsible repatriation of victims. These recommendations have been largely adopted 
in the measures formulated by the Task Force on Human Trafficking in its action plan.77 The measure 
concerning intensification of international cooperation contained a number of quick wins, for example 
with respect to cooperation with Nigeria, Bulgaria and Romania, China and India, the establishment of 
so-called Rapid Action Teams (RATs) and cooperation with Europol. These forms of cooperation relate 
not only to investigation and prosecution, but partly also to the prevention of human trafficking and 
shelter for victims and the repatriation of victims.
Furthermore, in 2005 the Dutch diplomatic missions in important countries of origin of victims were 
reminded of their role in combating human trafficking.78 Embassies were issued with guidelines for fi-
nancing anti-trafficking projects, in particular projects aimed at prevention and reintegration. According 
to the National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, embassies provide active support for local projects, 
such as publicity campaigns, reintegration programmes and capacity-building programmes for the po-
lice and the judiciary. The Rapporteur is regularly invited to provide input for such projects, including 
similar projects organised by other countries.79

2.3.4 International governmental organisations
The emphasis in intergovernmental organisations such as the United Nations, the European Union, the 
Council of Europe and the OSCE has now shifted from making rules to promoting their implementation. 
In that context, they call for international cooperation, the exchange of information and for more coun-
tries to appoint National Rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms, as well as for a more victim-centred, 
human rights approach to the problem. It is also apparent from the activities of these organisations 
that some subjects have special priority. They include exploitation in sectors outside the sex industry, 
the root causes of human trafficking and the demand side of the phenomenon. Special attention is also 
being devoted at international level to vulnerable groups such as women and children. International 
attention is also being devoted to the issue of human trafficking in connection with the deployment of 
soldiers and civilians to areas of conflict.NRM7

The Rapporteur warned in the Third report that strengthening international cooperation should not 
lead to the parallel and independent development of initiatives to address human trafficking with no 

76 NRM3, recommendation 40. See also § 2.8.2.
77 Action Plan of the Task Force on Human Trafficking, 2009a, measure 7, p. 30 et seq. See also Task Force 

on Human Trafficking, 2009b. 
78 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 12.
79 See Appendix 4 for a list of activities of the Rapporteur.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
38

coordination of the efforts of the parties taking the initiatives.80 Better communication and information 
about pending and current initiatives, in the fields of training, scientific research and data collection, 
for example, would avoid duplication of effort. This recommendation remains relevant, if only because 
of the various initiatives underway with respect to the collection of data.,81 However, the recommen-
dation is also valid with respect to international supervision and monitoring of action against human 
trafficking. While there is already an EU Action Plan on combating human traffickingNRM5 there is now 
also discussion in the UN about the adoption of a global action plan.82 Meanwhile, there are various 
other international reporting obligations concerning action being taken to combat human trafficking.83 
In this context, at the last meeting of the informal network of national rapporteurs and equivalent 
mechanisms, the European Commission was asked to press for international reporting obligations and 
requests for national data to be streamlined as far as possible.84

A useful contribution to the provision of information about current initiatives is a publication by the 
German Bundeskriminalamt that appeared in 2009. It contains an exhaustive overview of national and 
international activities taken to address human trafficking in the sex industry during the last 10 years.85

2.3.5 The European Union
In the context of promoting closer international cooperation, the Rapporteur earlier called for elabora-
tion of the idea of creating a European criminal law area for transnational forms of organised crime, and 
more specifically for fighting human trafficking. The Dutch government should, according to the Fifth 
report, persist in its efforts to ensure that human trafficking remains on the agenda at the European level 
and that more is done at that level to build on the accomplishments in the area of human trafficking.86 
Those efforts are being made and need to continue. For example, the European Commission’s evaluation 
of the EU Action Plan on combating human trafficking in 2008 said, among other things, that the avai-
lable data showed a wide gap between the legislation in place and its implementation in practice.NRM7

In April 2010 the European Commission published the Action Plan on the implementation of the 
Stockholm Programme.87The Commission formulated a number of actions to address human traf-
ficking in 2010, including the collection of comparable statistics on human trafficking, reports on 
the implementation of the EU Action Plan on combating human trafficking 2005-2009 and on 
the implementation of the Action Oriented Paper88 of November 2009.NRM7 The Commission also 
planned to report this year on the application of Directive 2004/81/EC and a possible successor to 

80 NRM3, recommendation 53.
81 On this point, see § 3.2.1 and NRM7, p. 105.
82 See NRM7, p. 63.
83 See § 1.3.
84 Second informal meeting of National Rapporteurs and equivalent mechanisms, 2 June 2010, Brussels.
85 There are almost 100 programmes. Bundeskriminalamt (2009). Palermo-Protokoll und die Folgen. Bekämp-

fung des „Menschenhandels zum Zweck sexueller Ausbeutung“- Materialsammlung zu nationalen und internationalen 
eher strategisch ausgerichteten Aktivitäten. Wiesbaden.

86 NRM5, recommendation 58.
87 The Stockholm programme was adopted by the European Council on 10/11 December 2009, Council 

Document 17024/09.
88 Action Oriented Paper on strengthening the EU external dimension on action against trafficking in human beings; Towards 

global EU action against trafficking in human beings, Council Document 6865/10.



Recommendations and developments
39

it.89 The European Commission intends to appoint an EU Anti-Trafficking Coordinator (ATC) and 
then wants to present a new integrated strategy for tackling human trafficking in 2011 as well as 
measures to protect and help victims through ad hoc cooperation agreements with third countries. 
The Commission also said that guidelines were needed to help consular services and border guards 
to identify victims of human trafficking.90

Following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon on 1 November 2009, the European Commission 
converted its proposal for a new EU Framework DecisionNRM7 into a proposal for a Directive on preven-
ting and combating human trafficking and protecting victims.91 In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur 
said of the original proposal that provisions regarding help for and protection of victims must not lead 
to restrictions on what has been achieved in the Council of Europe’s Convention on Action against 
Trafficking in Human Beings (2005).92 The BNC fiche (an assessment by the government of Commission 
proposals) on the current draft directive states, in any case, that the handling and implementation 
of the proposal must not be at the expense of ratification by the EU member states of the Council of 
Europe’s Convention.93 At the time of writing, the definitive version of the directive had not yet been 
adopted.

2.4	 Victims

2.4.1 Prevention aimed at victims and potential victims
Preventing individuals from becoming victims is an important element of anti-human trafficking 
policy. Relevant aspects of prevention are providing information, raising awareness and increasing 
the resilience of potential victims, as well as increasing consciousness of the phenomenon on human 
trafficking in general. The First report contained a call for more intensive and more widespread pu-
blicity about loverboy practices, which even then were common in the Netherlands. The Rapporteur 
felt the government had a responsibility in this regard, partly from the perspective of promoting 
emancipation in order to increase the resilience of potential victims, who were often young girls. 
The Rapporteur mentioned including information about the subject in the regular school curricu-
lum as an example of something that could be done.94 Projects to tackle the problem of loverboys, 
including information for schools about the problem, have been established in many cities.95 In 
2003, the first steps were taken to create a national register of juvenile prostitution and the natio-

89 Council Directive 2004/81/EC of 29 April 2004 on the residence permit issued to third-country nationals 
who are victims of trafficking in human beings or who have been the subject of an action to facilitate 
illegal immigration, who cooperate with the competent authorities, (OJ 2004, L261/19).

90 Action Plan Implementing the Stockholm Programme, 20 April 2010, COM(2010)171 final.
91 Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on preventing and combating trafficking in human 

beings, and protecting victims, repealing Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA, 29 March 2010, COM(2010)95 final, 
2010/0065 (COD).

92 NRM7, recommendation 46. 
93 Parliamentary Documents, session 2009-2010, 22 112, no. 1017, p. 6. ‘BNC’ stands for ‘Beoordeling Nieuwe 

Commissievoorstellen’.
94 NRM1, recommendation 22.
95 NRM5, pp. 68 et seq.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
40

nal platform on juvenile prostitution was formed96. Special programmes were also established for 
unaccompanied underage asylum seekers,97 while funds were provided to enable municipalities and 
victim support organisations to arrange programmes designed to help prostitutes who want to leave 
the profession.98

In recent years, attention has also been devoted to preventing exploitation outside the sex industry 
through publicity campaigns targeted at potential victims of exploitation outside the sex industry (see 
§ 2.7.3).
Little is known about the actual impact of prevention programmes. In the Fifth report, the Rapporteur 
called for research into this subject to facilitate more evidence-based action in the future99. The results 
of the so-called ‘systematic review’ of research into human trafficking might be able to provide some 
answers in a general sense.100

2.4.2 The exchange of information within the chain
The Third report drew attention to the problem that social workers often receive information in confi-
dence from victims that may also be relevant for criminal investigations. In view of the importance of 
their confidential relationship with clients and of not discouraging victims from seeking help, social 
workers cannot simply pass this information on to the police or the public prosecution service. The 
Rapporteur recommended searching for ways of making this information available to the police.101 This 
has been partially achieved through the development of local cooperation between the various organi-
sations in the chain, particularly in the large cities. Regular consultation and cooperation between the 
partners increases the mutual trust and removes obstacles. Further research into the reasons why victims 
are unwilling to report trafficking, as called for by the Rapporteur102, could increase the confidence of 
victims and social workers in the positive effects of providing information that is relevant for criminal 
investigations. The pilot project involving category-oriented shelter could have a similar positive effect. 
Nevertheless, this subject is still topical. Although voluntary agreements could remove formal obstacles 
to the exchange of confidential information, they would not totally safeguard that the handing over of 
client information would not harm the confidential relationship between the social worker and the 
victim.103,104

96 NRM5, p. 69.
97 In Utrecht for example, NRM5, p. 67. Programmes to increase the resilience of unaccompanied undera-

ge asylum seekers also have an important function in the context of preventing them from becoming 
victims again in their country of origin.

98 Parliamentary Documents II 2008/09, 31 700 VI no. 89 (Regulation on Exit Programmes for Prostitutes 
-RUPS).

99 NRM5, recommendation 20.
100 This study, jointly initiated by BNRM, is being carried out by the WODC, the University of Amsterdam 

and the Netherlands Institute for the Study of Crime and Law Enforcement (NSCR); the results of the 
study, which is confined to research into transnational human trafficking, are not yet available.

101 NRM3, recommendation 23.
102 NRM7, recommendation 32.
103 Meeting of the network of organisations for victims of human trafficking in Rotterdam, 8 April 2010.
104 See also the description in § 2.7.3 of a film about human trafficking, commissioned by the ministries of 

Justice, of the Interior and Kingdom Relations and of Social Affairs and Employment, for professionals 
who may encounter human trafficking on a regular or occasional basis. 



Recommendations and developments
41

2.4.3 Shelter

Category-oriented shelter
The Rapporteur has made a number of recommendations concerning the development of shelter and 
care tailored to the specific needs of victims of human trafficking in general, and specifically of distinct 
categories of victims, such as minors, aliens and victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex 
industry. In the Third report, this took the form of a recommendation that victim support organisations 
should provide the central government with advice about whether shelter should be provided by category 
of victim or whether integrated shelter would be a better option, taking into account aspects such as pro-
per recognition of a person’s status as a victim, the best use of the expertise available at local level and the 
need to offer security for victims.105 In the Fifth report, the Rapporteur further recommended reviewing 
whether category-oriented shelter could help to resolve the problems encountered in finding suitable 
accommodation for victims in shelters.106 The Rapporteur also recommended adapting the shelters and 
reception facilities to respond to developments such as growth in the number of victims and changes 
in the types of victim. The criminalisation of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry was an 
important factor behind that recommendation. The Rapporteur suggested the possibility of specialised 
centres, referring to Belgium where other forms of exploitation had been a criminal offence for far longer 
and where there were separate shelters for men and women and for victims of sexual exploitation and 
other forms of exploitation.107 In its action plan in January 2009, the Task Force on Human Trafficking 
included the proposal by the State Secretaries for Justice and for Health, Welfare and Sport to start a pilot 
project involving category-oriented shelter in order to investigate whether victims of human trafficking 
could be provided with safe shelter and how it could be organised on a permanent basis.108 For this pilot 
project, a tender procedure was organised for the creation of 50 places, to be established in existing facili-
ties. On 15 June 2010, the Minister of Justice opened the pilot project at one of the three selected locations, 
with 20 places for female victims. The intention is that the pilot project will continue until 15 June 2012.
The pilot scheme will be evaluated by the Ministry of Justice’s Research and Documentation Centre 
(WODC).

Shelter capacity
There has been a chronic shortage of facilities for the initial reception of victims of human trafficking 
and of places they can later be transferred to for longer-term shelter and specific care in the last decade. 
The Rapporteur has repeatedly drawn attention to this problem. For example, in 2002 the Rapporteur 
recommended increasing the capacity for shelter and care for underage victims, including unaccompa-
nied underage asylum seekers.109 The Rapporteur also recommended that underage victims should be 
given shelter separately from adult victims and that help and care should be tailored more specifically 
to this specific category of victim. She also suggested that the government provide structural financing 
for victim support organisations to guarantee the continuity of the essential care and shelter for victims 
that these organisations provide, and to increase their professionalism.110 In the Third report, the Rap-

105 NRM3, recommendation 25.
106 NRM5, recommendation 35.
107 NRM5, recommendation 36
108 Task Force on Human Trafficking, 2009a, measure 5.
109 NRM1, recommendation 21.
110 NRM1, recommendation 19.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
42

porteur recommended addressing the shortage of shelter capacity victims by keeping accurate records of 
available spaces and by creating additional places.111 The recommendation to provide financial support 
for victim-support agencies was also repeated.112 In the Fifth report, the Rapporteur suggested investi-
gating whether measures such as central intake and category-oriented shelter for victims could ease the 
problems with finding suitable accommodation.113

The urgency of creating sufficient capacity, providing support for victim-support agencies and improving 
the registration of details of victims has been acknowledged by the government and translated into action 
points in the National Action Plan of Human Trafficking (NAP).114 The plan indicated that the capacity in 
shelters for women would be expanded.115 It also stated that the Federation of Shelters would take measures 
to improve access to shelters for women, as well as improving their safety, in order to make them suitable 
also for victims of human trafficking. The federation would furthermore improve the registration of availa-
ble places so that the capacity can be better utilised.116 A study to investigate whether safe houses could be 
employed to increase safety was also announced.117 A final proposal was to expand the capacity of shelters 
specifically for victims of human trafficking: the aforementioned pilot project in category-oriented shelter.
In 2009, the Rapporteur was forced to observe that there was still a shortage of places in shelters and 
therefore once again recommended creating additional capacity.118 The Rapporteur also suggested making 
a start with the pilot project on category-oriented shelter, which had been seriously delayed.119 The additi-
onal places were made available in June and July 2010. The number of places, for a projected average stay 
of three months, was thereby increased by 50, albeit only for the duration of the project. It was believed 
that this could resolve the estimated shortage of 200 places annually, but it is not yet certain that it will. 
CoMensha, the organisation responsible for the central intake, said in its annual report for 2009 that 
the pilot project represented a welcome expansion of shelter capacity but that the places would be filled 
within two months unless there were adequate follow-up facilities for the residents.120 When the Minister 
of Justice officially opened the pilot project, twelve of the 20 places available in one of the locations were 
already occupied, and two new victims were being admitted every day in consultation with CoMensha. The 
capacity was therefore expected to be fully used very quickly. Although the action plan for the pilot project 
stated that the places in the pilot project were in addition to municipalities’ existing shelter facilities for 
victims of human trafficking,121 the availability of and capacity in follow-up shelter or accommodation 
remains a matter of concern.122 The municipalities have a major responsibility in this regard.

111 NRM3, recommendation 28.
112 NRM3, recommendation 21.
113 NRM5, recommendation 35.
114 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, Parliamentary Documents II 2004/05, 28 638, no. 13.
115 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 29.
116 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 30: the Open Places Reporting Centre.
117 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 31.
118 NRM7, recommendation 22.
119 NRM7, recommendation 21.
120 Annual Report 2009, CoMensha, p.14 et seq.
121 Project plan for the pilot project in category-oriented shelter for victims of human trafficking, sum-

mary, p. 3.
122 The Stichting Hulp en Opvang Prostitutie in The Hague announced in July 2010 that it was forced to 

impose an immediate freeze on admitting new clients due to an excessive increase in the number of 
victims of human trafficking registering with it.



Recommendations and developments
43

2.4.4 Underage victims

Victims of loverboys
The Rapporteur drew attention to the phenomenon of ‘loverboys’ and their victims in the very first re-
port. There were many underage victims in the Netherlands of traffickers known by this term, which is 
usually used to refer to young men who use seduction techniques to charm vulnerable young girls with 
the ultimate aim of getting those girls to work for them in prostitution.123 The Rapporteur observed that 
there was too little specialized shelter for underage victims of human trafficking. This category of victim, 
said the Rapporteur, deserved special attention, shelter and counselling because of the specific nature 
of these victims and the problems that the young victim encounters.
Care and shelter for underage victims has remained a persistent area of concern. In the Seventh report, 
the Rapporteur recommended that underage victims should also be covered by aforementioned pilot 
project on category-oriented shelter,124 pointing out that it was difficult to see why the purpose of the 
project, which was to investigate how to provide shelter that is safe, adequate and otherwise tailored to 
the needs of victims, did not extend to underage victims in the Netherlands.125 In reply to questions in 
parliament, the Minister for Youth and Family said he did not feel that specialised shelters for this group 
were necessary because the existing facilities in the youth care system were, in principle, capable of 
handling any conceivable problem.126 The Minister referred to outreach projects to help victims of ‘pimp 
boys’,127 and to victim support programmes by the youth care services aimed at increasing the resilience 
of girls who are vulnerable to pimp boys. These programmes are organised as part of the regular youth 
care service. If closed care is needed to prevent a young person from leaving or being removed from care, 
the young person can be admitted to a closed youth shelter facility, the Minister said.
In itself, it is understandable that the government regards care for underage victims as a task of the youth 
care services. However, there are no special facilities in the residential youth care system for victims 
of human trafficking for whom the need for shelter is indicated. The Rapporteur had already said in 
the Fifth report that simply locking up girls to protect them from themselves and their traffickers was 
highly undesirable and urged that attempts be made to find alternatives.128 Although it is unfortunately 
sometimes inevitable that underage victims have to be accommodated in a closed or protected facility, 
to prevent them from running away and to isolate them effectively from the influence and threats of 
the loverboy, it is important that the facilities do not have the image or the regime of detention centres.
Given the long-standing and serious nature of the problem, it might have been expected that a vision 
would be formulated on the subject of shelter for underage victims of loverboys. That is one of the rea-
sons the Rapporteur addressed one of her recommendations in the Seventh report to the Task Force on 
Human Trafficking, calling on it to devote special attention to underage victims.129 She referred in that 
context to the experience that has already been gained with providing specialised shelter and assistance 
outside the youth care services.

123 NRM7, p. 347 et seq.
124 NRM7, recommendation 21.
125 See also § 3.3.1, Figure 5, Proportion of underage victims among Dutch, Nigerian and other non-Dutch 

reported victims (2006-2009).
126 Attachment to Parliamentary Proceedings II 2009/10, no. 460 and n. 461.
127 ‘For a discussion of the debate about the use of the terms ‘loverboy’ or ‘pimp boy’, see NRM7, p. 35.
128 NRM5, recommendation 37.
129 NRM7, recommendation 25.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
44

Victims of loverboys are not always exploited in the sex industry. They are sometimes also induced to 
smuggle drugs or take out loans. Nor does the loverboy technique still primarily involve creating an 
emotional bond with girls in order to exploit them. Sometimes, the far more direct and quicker method 
of violence or blackmail is employed.130 One of the consequences is that the characteristics of victims 
can change. For this reason, the Rapporteur recommended in the Seventh report that victim-support 
organisations should be mindful of the changing nature of the methods used by human traffickers and 
ensuing changes in the categories of victims.131 In any case, it is clear that the internet has rapidly as-
sumed a more prominent role in recent years, a role that is likely to grow even further132.

Unaccompanied underage aliens
Among underage victims of human trafficking, the Rapporteur has particularly highlighted the situation 
of unaccompanied underage aliens,133 reporting that they, even more than their Dutch fellow-sufferers, 
often face physical and psychological pressure as a result of their uncertain position and future, either 
in the Netherlands or in their country of origin.134 In the First report, the Rapporteur said that structural 
attention should be devoted to the safety of women and unaccompanied underage asylum seekers in 
asylum centres.135 Unaccompanied underage aliens face a heightened risk of falling victim to human 
trafficking. Some are brought to the Netherlands to work in prostitution under false pretences. Others 
are recruited later in a shelter, using loverboy techniques or otherwise.136 A study showed that the re-
ception centres for aliens do not afford a safe refuge for female unaccompanied underage aliens and do 
not protect them adequately against the risks of human trafficking. A great many girls went missing and 
there were fears that a significant number of them had fallen prey to human traffickers.137 This prompted 
a number of the relevant organisations, including the Immigration and Naturalisation Service (IND), 
the Central Body for the Reception of Asylum Seekers (COA), the police and several shelters, to draft the 
Protocol on missing unaccompanied underage aliens, which contains guidelines for preventing or dea-
ling with the disappearance of children from the centres.138 Other measures included the introduction 
of round-the-clock supervision and the fingerprinting of the children at the start of the procedure. A 
pilot project was started for unaccompanied underage aliens at the greatest risk of disappearing (at that 
time those from India and Nigeria).139 This pilot project with protected shelter started on 1 January 2008 
and ran until the spring of 2010. The shelter was small and the supervision was intensive. The young 
people were only allowed to leave the shelter with permission, and under escort if necessary. Camera 
surveillance and security guards were also used.

130 NRM7, p. 35.
131 NRM7, recommendation 24.
132 Zanetti, 2009. 
133 Unaccompanied underage asylum seekers form a distinct group within the category of unaccompanied 

underage aliens. 
134 NRM1, recommendation 21.
135 NRM3, recommendation 19.
136 NRM3, p. 51.
137 Brouns et al., 2003.
138 NRM5, p. 44.
139 Letter from the Minister for Immigration and Integration to the Lower House of Parliament, 5 Decem-

ber 2006. Parliamentary Documents II 2006/07, 20 062, no. 56



Recommendations and developments
45

The pilot project was evaluated by the WODC and the Willem Pompe Institute of the University of 
Utrecht140. Among their conclusions were the following:
- The number of unaccompanied underage aliens of the predetermined at-risk nationalities entering 

the shelter fell sharply during the project, probably as a result of successful police investigations.
- The percentage of disappearances declined, partly as a result of the pilot project.
- There was no increase in the numbers returning to their country of origin.
- Young people who had not actually been exploited often did not want protection.
- Few reports of human trafficking were made. Among the possible explanations: some young 

people are not yet ready to report; they claim they face no risk of exploitation; they are afraid 
of the police or of reprisals from the traffickers; the lawyer first wants to await the outcome of 
the asylum procedure.

- When reports were made, it was often decided not to prosecute the case or nothing more was 
heard about it.

- Placement in the protected shelter involves deprivation of liberty, although there is no statutory 
basis for it or judicial review.141

2.4.5 Victims of ‘other forms of exploitation’
Exploitation in sectors outside the sex industry (‘other forms of exploitation’) was made a criminal of-
fence in 2005. There was no intention to create a distinction between exploitation in the sex industry 
and in other sectors; the treatment of victims and the facilities provided for them should be the same. 
Nevertheless, mindfulness of the situation of victims of other forms of exploitation has grown slowly. 
The victims themselves are often more reluctant than victims in the sex industry to disclose their ex-
periences. They do not always see themselves as victims, but it could also be connected with the fact 
that many are living or working illegally in the Netherlands, the fear of deportation, the fear that their 
statement will have negative consequences for colleagues who are working illegally, the fact that the 
situation in their country of origin is possibly even worse, or accumulated debts. Threats can also pay 
a role in some cases of other forms of exploitation, and victims of other forms of exploitation can also 
feel shame at what has happened to them.142

Furthermore, other forms of exploitation are often perceived as a less serious form of human trafficking. 
Indications of other forms of exploitation are frequently not recognised, passed on and followed up. For 
a long time, the number of prosecutions remained relatively small and it is still by no means automati-
cally assumed that facilities for victims, such as shelter and help, also apply for victims outside the sex 
industry.143 The Someren case illustrated this.

In the case of the asparagus farm in Someren, it was revealed that foreign workers had been forced 
to work and had been accommodated in slavery-like conditions. Various authorities were aware of 
at least six different indications of exploitation. Nevertheless, the foreign ‘employees’ were not in-
formed about the B9 regulation,144 they were not given adequate shelter (they were housed in three 

140 Letter from the Minister of Justice, Reaction to the Seventh Report of the National Rapporteur on Traf-
ficking in Human Beings, 21 January 2010, Parliamentary Documents 20009/10, 28 638 no. 47, p. 4.

141 Kromhout et al., 2010.
142 NRM5, p. 47.
143 NRM7, p. 478.
144 See below, § 2.5.1.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
46

large tents), they were not interviewed or otherwise treated as possible victims and they were not 
reported to CoMensha. None of the relevant authorities, including the mayor, the Labour Inspecto-
rate, the police, the municipality, the fire brigade and the public prosecution service, identified the 
incident as a possible case of human trafficking, even though the mayor did describe the conditions 
as modern slavery. Later, a prosecution was brought, based on a suspicion of human trafficking.

A common practical problem that arises in providing shelter and help for victims outside the sex industry 
is that the number of victims involved in a single case can be large (as in Someren, where there were 
55 possible victims). Another is that the victims are relatively frequently men, for whom it is difficult to 
find shelter because the shelter facilities are traditionally designed for women. However, this cannot 
be a reason for departing from the relevant procedures, such as the requirement to inform possible 
victims of the B9 regulation if there is even the slightest indication of human trafficking. Exploitation 
in sectors other than the sex industry is a violation of human rights, and the need for shelter is often 
equally great. In principle, the seriousness of the exploitation does not depend on the sector in which 
it occurs. Naturally, the need for shelter and help can vary very significantly.
The Rapporteur recommended expanding facilities for victims and adapting them to the changing target 
group,145 and more attention has been devoted to the question of facilities for male victims since then. 
For example, 10 places were reserved for them in the pilot project on category-oriented shelter. In the 
so-called ‘male shelter pilot project’, two of the 10 places in each of the four large cities were reserved 
for victims of human trafficking.146 In its reaction to the recommendations in the Seventh report, the 
government said an attempt would be made to extend this pilot project.147

The Rapporteur also recommended that the agencies involved in tackling other forms of exploitation 
should make agreements on who is responsible for initiating help for possible victims of those forms 
of exploitation and draw up schedules laying down out which agency will do what, and when, to ensure 
that victims do not fall through gaps in the system.148

2.5	 Immigration	law

2.5.1 B9 regulation
At the time of the reform of Dutch immigration law in 2000, the so-called B9 regulation was inserted 
in the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000149 for victims and witnesses of human trafficking 
without a valid residence permit, replacing the former B17 regulation in the Aliens Act Implementation 
Guidelines 1994. Under the B9 regulation, aliens who are victims or possible victims or witnesses of 
human trafficking can remain legally in the Netherlands during the investigation and prosecution of a 
case so that they remain available to the police and public prosecution service.150 The B9 regulation is 
a hybrid measure. On the one hand, the rules are intended to ensure the availability of victims for the 

145 NRM5, recommendation 36.
146 Dijk et al., 2010. 
147 Letter from the Minister of Justice, Reaction to the Seventh Report of the National Rapporteur on Traf-

ficking in Human Beings, 21 January 2010, Parliamentary Documents II 2009/10, 28 638, no. 47, p. 3.
148 NRM7, recommendation 23.
149 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000 (April 2001).
150 EU nationals can also acquire rights under the regulation.



Recommendations and developments
47

purposes of an investigation and prosecution. On the other hand, the regulation entitles the victim to 
temporary residence and access to certain facilities. This brings with it the risk that the scheme might be 
abused by individuals in an attempt to remain in the Netherlands. Equally, however, there is a risk that 
the victim’s rights will not be respected if he or she is unable or unwilling, out of fear or for any other 
reason, to cooperate with the police and public prosecution service.151

The Rapporteur has made a series of recommendations in connection with the B9 regulation in the last 
decade.

Willingness to report
Human trafficking is an offence that can be prosecuted without a complaint. The investigation and 
prosecution of human trafficking are regarded as important in the interests of protecting general social 
values. The police must always start an investigation if there is any indication of human trafficking, even 
if there is no report.152 Nevertheless, the cooperation of victims is very valuable. It is very important in 
the fight against human trafficking that victims report incidents and are willing to report and otherwise 
cooperating with the criminal process.153 Over the years, however, it has been apparent that, for various 
reasons, victims find it difficult to report a crime, so policies are needed to increase the willingness of 
victims to report. In the very first report, the Rapporteur said that the B9 regulation was a step in the 
right direction for victims without a valid residence permit, but was still not sufficiently concerned with 
providing facilities for victims. Consequently, the benefits of the regulation for the victims were often 
outweighed by the risks they faced in reporting an offence.154 The Rapporteur therefore recommended 
that victims should also be offered legal assistance and protection under the B9 regulation. In the Third 
report, the Rapporteur went further and recommended that all of the authorities involved in implemen-
ting the B9 regulation should inform victims as quickly an as completely as possible about their rights 
and options under the B9 regulation, as regards both social security and the criminal law and immigra-
tion law aspects.155 Sufficient opportunities should also be created – in consultation with the competent 
authorities – to provide concrete and adequate legal assistance in those areas. The Rapporteur added that 
it would be inappropriate to restrict access to or the duration of the assistance.156 The Rapporteur said it 
was important to guarantee that victims of human trafficking received good legal advice on all relevant 
areas of the law (immigration law, criminal law, but also labour law, for example),157 adding that victims 
should be advised of the possibility of receiving legal advice at the earlier possible moment. For aliens 
living illegally in the Netherlands, that is the moment when they must be offered the reflection period 
on the grounds of the B9 regulation.158

151 In this context, see the Rapporteur’s reaction to the advisory report ‘Protect Victims and Fight Human 
Trafficking. An advisory report on a balanced protective regime for the victims of human trafficking’ 
by the  Advisory Committee on Migration Affairs (ACVZ), NRM7, pp. 177-178 [this section was not in the 
English version]and Appendix 6

152 Instructions on Human Trafficking and other forms of exploitation in prostitution, Government Gazette, 
2008, 235. 

153 NRM1, p. 70 et seq.
154 NRM1, recommendation 6.
155 NRM3, recommendation 14
156 NRM3, recommendation 15.
157 NRM5, recommendation 38.
158 NRM5, recommendation 39.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
48

These recommendations prompted a number of amendments to the B9 regulation. A provision was 
inserted that the care coordinator159 would be ultimately responsible for the shelter of the suspected 
victim during the reflection period. The care coordinator would arrange a medical examination and 
medical treatment, if necessary, and ensure that the victim was properly informed of the legal conse-
quences of reporting a crime. If necessary, the Legal Aid Board would be asked to finance the necessary 
legal assistance.160

Another recommendation was that it should be possible for victims to work and follow training during 
the period of the temporary residence permit to avoid the risk of their falling back into their former 
situation.161 The B9 regulation now includes a provision allowing work to be performed, although not 
during the reflection period.162 Once the residence permit has been granted, the victim can also avail of 
the possibilities to follow a training course and to engage in other activities163.

Following the Third report, the government produced the National Action Plan on Human Trafficking 
(NAP)164, which contains a series of specific measures in the different policy areas. In the NAP, the gover-
nment said that municipalities would be informed of the policy changes concerning work and training 
and would be encouraged to help victims with B9 status to find suitable work and provide them with 
advice.165 It also said that legal aid counsellors would also be informed of the various possibilities for 
securing financing for legal aid.166

In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur addressed the problem raised by the police and the public prosecu-
tion service that reports of human trafficking made by aliens without a residence permit sometimes con-
tained few if any leads for an investigation. In view of the priorities that have been set,167 these cases take up 
the resources of the police and the public prosecution service, as well as the shelters, but cannot ultimately 
be successfully resolved.168 There are various reasons why reports might contain few leads: the failure to 
record the report properly, reluctance on the part of the victim because of fear or shame, manipulation of 
the victim’s story by the human trafficker, and perhaps also false claims by individuals that they are victims.
On the one hand, the police and the public prosecution service repeatedly report problems with the 
waste of resources in these ‘hopeless’ cases, while at the same time victim-support workers say that 
cases involving foreign victims are not properly dealt with.169 BNRM has been involved in attempts 
to find solutions for the tensions arising from the B9 regulation. In 2008, for example, it organised 
an ‘Expert meeting on hopeless B9 applications’.170 This was followed by the recommendation in the 

159 Care coordinators have not yet been appointed everywhere, NRM7, p. 142.
160 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000, § B9, 3.2.9 and 4.2.4, Government Gazette 2006, 201.06.2.
161 NRM1, recommendation 12. See also NR 3, recommendation 10.
162 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000, § B9, 7.2, work is allowed, no work permit is required.
163 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000, B9, 4.2.2.
164 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, Parliamentary Documents II 2004/05, 28 638, no. 13.
165 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 36.
166 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 23.
167 See the public prosecution service’s Instructions on Human Trafficking, Government Gazette, 2008, 253.
168 NRM7, pp. 176 et seq.
169 NRM7, p. 176.
170 NRM7, p. 191.



Recommendations and developments
49

Seventh report to conduct further research into the reasons for the unwillingness of victims report 
trafficking,171 after it was revealed that a highly relevant study into this subject by the research depart-
ment of the public prosecution service (WBOM) had been halted.NRM7 172 To this end, the Rapporteur 
recommended accelerating the procedures (such as the decision not to prosecute and the hearing of 
objections), conducting research into the reasons for the absence of leads and the reluctance of victims 
to report crimes.173 She also suggested the possibility of carrying out a pilot project in which a number of 
cases with few leads would be investigated intensively to discover whether, and if so how and in which 
cases, it would be possible to generate more leads. Such a pilot project could also address the question 
of whether more specific forms of assistance in category-oriented shelters could help to improve the 
quality of reports.
The Minister of Justice had previously acknowledged that a person whose statement provided few leads 
in a case could nevertheless still be a victim of human trafficking.174

In his reaction to the Seventh report,175 the Minister of Justice said, among other things, that the public 
prosecution service would review the problems and consider ways of accelerating the procedures in such 
a way as to limit the unnecessary waste of resources.176 The task force could implement measures in res-
ponse to the findings. The Minister also said he saw no need for a pilot project relating to the willingness 
of victims to report trafficking, for example because the pilot project involving category-oriented shelter 
could have a positive effect on the willingness to report.177

Expansion of the regulation
The Rapporteur referred in the First report to the fact that, under the original B9 regulation, no reflection 
period could be granted to possible victims of human trafficking who had not already worked as prostitu-
tes in the Netherlands.178 This was a reference to aliens who were identified as possible victims of human 
trafficking by the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee on their arrival at Schiphol. The Rapporteur remarked 
that it was possible that opportunities for prosecutions were being needlessly missed by excluding this 
category of victim. Given the often transnational nature of human trafficking, even before they reached 
the Netherlands these victims might already have been exposed to traumatic experiences that would 

171 NRM7, recommendation 32. On this point, see also §§ 2.4 and 2.5.
172 The study entitled Het slachtoffer en zijn ketens. Een studie naar mensenhandel in strafrechtelijk perspectief  was 

published by the Verwey-Jonker Institute in the autumn of 2009.
173 NRM7, recommendation 32.
174 Letter from the Minister of Justice to the Lower House of Parliament of 9 June 2009, TK 28 638-43. 
175 Letter of 21 January 2010, also on behalf of the State Secretary of Justice, the Minister of the Interior 

and Kingdom Relations, the Minister of Social Affairs and Employment and the Minister for Youth and 
Family.

176 Letter from Minister of Justice, Reaction to the Seventh Report of the National Rapporteur on Traffic-
king in Human Beings, 21 January 2010, Parliamentary Documents II, 2009/10, 28 638, no. 47. At the time 
of writing, noting is known of the outcome of this.

177 In its annual report for 2009, CoMensha mentioned a study into the willingness of East European vic-
tims of human trafficking to report the crime carried out by a student of criminology from the National 
Police Services Agency (KLPD), Annual Report CoMensha 2009, p. 21. At the time of writing, the study 
had not yet been published. 

178 NRM1, recommendation 10.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
50

prevent them from immediately report trafficking in human beings. The Rapporteur therefore recom-
mended that the reflection period should also be available to victims in this category.179

In response to this, a provision was inserted in the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines to the effect 
that the rules on the reflection period would also apply to aliens who had not yet entered the Nether-
lands but who might be victims of human trafficking.180

The Rapporteur also proposed that restricting the B9 regulation to persons who made a report of human 
trafficking could unnecessarily exclude victims who did not dare to report but were prepared to make 
another form of statement to the police about what had happened to them. Dutch criminal law makes 
no distinction between the evidentiary value of a report and of other statements.181 The distinction is 
therefore irrelevant for the application of the B9 regulation: what counts is the cooperation with the 
investigation and prosecution. In light of that, the Rapporteur recommended equating a report and any 
other statement for the purposes of the B9 regulation.182

This recommendation was adopted, thereby making a report the same as otherwise cooperating with a 
criminal investigation under the Aliens Decree183 and the B9 regulation.184

Consequences under immigration law arising from the non-punishment principle
Under immigration law, criminal antecedents are an incriminating factor for an alien. It is possi-
ble, however, that the offences were committed by a victim of human trafficking in a situation of 
exploitation. That prompted the Rapporteur to recommend that a person’s status as victim and the 
relationship between the offence committed by the victim and the human trafficking situation should 
be taken into account in decisions made under immigration law. The Rapporteur stressed that every 
victim who cooperated with the criminal investigation against a human trafficker should be eligible 
for the rights under the B9 regulation, in principle even when the victim has criminal antecedents, 
adding that the fact that the person is a victim and the relationship with the offence committed by 
the victim should be explicitly taken into account when making a decision of whether to declare 
a person an undesirable alien or whether to grant continued residence. This recommendation was 
based on the non-punishment principle, an international principle to the effect that victims of hu-
man trafficking should not be punished for offences committed in a situation where they are being 
exploited.185 The recommendation that no victim who cooperates with a criminal investigation against 
the human trafficker should be denied the rights ensuing from the B9 regulation also relates to the 
situation where there is no connection between the offence committed by the victim and the human 
trafficking situation. This is based on the consideration that the importance of the information that 
a victim can provide with a view to a possible prosecution should prevail over considerations based 
on immigration policy.

179 NRM1, recommendation 10.
180 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000, p. 2, ad a.; entry into force on 1 January 2009, Government Gazette 

2009, 78.
181 See NRM5, p. 17. 
182 NRM5, recommendation 6.
183 Article 3.48 of the Aliens Decree.
184 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000, p. 3, ad b.
185 See NRM7, Chapter 6.



Recommendations and developments
51

In his reaction to the Seventh report, the Minister of Justice, also speaking on behalf of other relevant 
ministers, said that he agreed with this recommendation.186 In a letter to the Lower House of Parliament 
on 10 February 2010,187 however, the Rapporteur pointed out that it was apparent from the further explana-
tion given by the Minister in his letter that he was thinking mainly of criminal offences that were commit-
ted in relation to a situation of exploitation. The Rapporteur’s recommendation, however, also refers to 
situations in which that relationship is less direct. It would not be effective to let slip opportunities for suc-
cessful prosecution by not allowing victims with criminal antecedents to benefit from the B9 regulation.

Reflection period
The B9 regulation prescribes that aliens without a residence permit must be offered a reflection period 
at the slightest indication of human trafficking. In 2002, the Rapporteur pointed out that victims so-
metimes needed more than three months to recover sufficiently and to become calm enough to make a 
clear decision on whether to report human trafficking. In view of the importance of the victim’s coope-
ration with criminal proceedings, the Rapporteur therefore recommended creating an option in the B9 
regulation for the reflection period to be extended once by an additional three months.188 This recom-
mendation did not lead to a specific policy change. In the EU member states, the reflection period varies 
from 30 days to six months.189 The regulation more than meets the requirements of the EU directive on 
residence permits issued to third-country nationals who are victims of trafficking in human beings.190

The B9 regulation in practice
The recommendations extended not only to the B9 regulation itself, but also to its implementation in 
practice. For example in the Third report the Rapporteur drew attention to the fact that the relevant 
agencies implemented the B9 regulation very differently in practice, pointing out that the correct and 
uniform application of the regulation would benefit if the agencies explained their tasks more clearly to 
each other and to their own employees.191 The Rapporteur went on to recommend that all chain partners 
should immediately inform victims of all their rights under the scheme.192

Although no distinction is made in the B9 regulation between victims of sexual exploitation and exploi-
tation in other sectors (‘other forms of exploitation’), (potential) situations of other forms of exploita-
tion are, in practice, dealt with differently than sexual exploitation. (Potential) victims of other forms of 
exploitation are not always recognised as victims and are consequently not alerted to their rights under 
the B9 regulation and are not offered a reflection period. These discrepancies are due to differences of 
perception rather than differences in the rules.

186 Letter from Minister of Justice, Reaction to the Seventh Report of the National Rapporteur on Traf-
ficking in Human Beings, 21 January 2010, Parliamentary Documents II 2009/10, 28 638, no. 47, p.7.

187 Letter from the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings to parliament’s Permanent Com-
mittee for Justice concerning the government’s reaction to the Seventh Report on Trafficking in Human 
Beings, 10 February 2010. 

188 NRM1, recommendation 20.
189 See Academic Network for Legal Studies on Immigration and Asylum in Europe, Synthesis Report, writ-

ten for the European Commission in relation to the implementations by EU member states of Directive 
2004/81 (victims of trafficking), JLS/B4/2006/03.

190 Council Directive 2004/81/EC (OJ 2004, L 261/19).
191 NRM3, recommendation 13.
192 NRM3, recommendation 14.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
52

At the instigation of the Rapporteur, the text of the B9 regulation was amended in April 2009 with the 
aim of reflecting more clearly that the regulation extends to victims of exploitation in sectors outside 
the sex industry.193

To ensure proper implementation of the B9 regulation, the Rapporteur recommended establishing a cen-
tral office with the task of monitoring problems with the implementation of the regulation, providing ad-
vice on how to solve them and, if necessary, intervening. The Rapporteur recommended the creation of an 
authoritative body, given the multiplicity of disciplines involved in the implementation of the regulation.194

In response to the recommendations in the Third report, the government said in the NAP that the so-
called ‘B9 platform’ (the CoMensha platform) could perform that function for the time being.195 This 
platform hosts regular meetings of representatives of the organisations most closely involved in imple-
menting the B9 regulation.

In the First report, the Rapporteur described the experience of many victim-support workers that aliens 
who might be victims of human trafficking were often deported as illegal aliens before there was a 
chance to apply the B9 regulation or before they were given an opportunity to invoke it. This is not only 
undesirable from a humanitarian viewpoint, but might also mean the loss of evidence that could lead 
to prosecution. The Rapporteur therefore recommended that the IND, the aliens police and the criminal 
investigative services should cooperate more closely and agree on ways to improve the situation.196

This recommendation was repeated in the Third report, noting that it was essential to avoid not apply-
ing the B9 regulation in practice. When a lot of emphasis is placed on the importance of the immediate 
deportation of illegal aliens and insufficient attention is paid to the possibility that they are victims of 
human trafficking, the reflection period is rarely offered, according to the Rapporteur, who recommen-
ded that structural measures should be taken to prevent this.197

At that time, the Minister for Immigration and Integration had recently published a policy document 
on illegal aliens,198 in which she had said that the approach to illegal aliens and combating human traf-
ficking were in principle two separate policy areas. But the two areas do overlap and measures taken in 
one policy area can reinforce measures in the other. The policy document made a number of proposals 
in that context and also announced that further measures would follow after the publication of the 
Rapporteur’s Third report. Following publication of that report, the government published the National 
Action Plan on Human Trafficking, in which it endorsed the need for structural measures to prevent the 
B9 regulation not being applied in practice, particularly with respect to offering the period of reflection 
to decide whether to report human trafficking.199 The government said that the relevant agencies had 
taken part in a conference in November 2003 to explore ways of improving the implementation of the 
B9 regulation and that they had started making the improvements suggested at that conference in rela-
tion to sharing information and identifying problems, as well as providing information to victims and 
creating files. The government also acknowledged the possibility of a conflict at local level between the 

193 Government Gazette 2009, 78.
194 NRM3, recommendation 16.
195 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 24.
196 NRM1, recommendation 13.
197 NRM3, recommendation 11.
198 Parliamentary Documents II 2003/04,29 537, no. 2.
199 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, p. 17.



Recommendations and developments
53

supervision of aliens and the application of the B9 regulation and mentioned that the Ministry of Justice 
was subsidising a study by Humanitas Bonded Labour in Nederland (BLinN) into the question of whether 
B9 status was actually being offered to potential victims.200 In the report of that study BLinN said that 
victims in aliens detention were often not recognised as victims.201 A number of steps have since been 
taken with regard to the identification of possible victims of human trafficking in aliens detention and 
attention for this group has increased. For example, in 2006 the Ministry of Justice arranged several 
meetings with representatives of the police, IND, Stichting tegen Vrouwenhandel (STV; now CoMensha), 
the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and BLinN to look for solutions to problems relating 
to the identification of and support for potential victims in this group.202

In January 2009, BLinN published another report about victims of human trafficking in aliens detention. 
In this report, BLinN mentioned several practical bottlenecks in the implementation of the B9 regu-
lation. Once again, its principal conclusion was that identification of victims of human trafficking in 
aliens detention needed to improve. In a reaction to the report, the government pointed out that since 
2005 a lot had been done to improve the identification of victims and that the subject was still receiving 
attention. Nevertheless, the state secretary said, it is not always possible to avoid detaining (suspected) 
victims of human trafficking.203

Linking assistance to cooperation
The Rapporteur has drawn attention to two situations that are not covered by the B9 regulation.
In the First report, the Rapporteur found that there might be situations where the victim is willing to 
cooperate but no investigation is launched for reasons over which the victim has no control, such as 
the fact that the suspect cannot be traced. The victim is then no longer entitled to temporary residence 
under the B9 regulation and should consequently be deported. The Rapporteur took the position that 
if shelter and assistance are appropriate for humanitarian reasons, in such exceptional situations it 
should be possible to make an exception to the rules on deportation and recommended including that 
option in the regulation.204

In the Third report, the Rapporteur highlighted the situation where a person who is clearly a victim 
(for example, according to the list of indications employed by the police) does not want to cooperate 
because, for example, he or she does not dare to report human trafficking, or even consider to do so. 
The Rapporteur recommended that in such cases, where the B9 regulation does not apply, shelter and 
assistance should still be offered to the victim.205 In the NAP, the government acknowledged that there 
are persons who do not dare to cooperate but who are clearly victims and need help. The government 
pointed out that those victims could apply for asylum and receive assistance in that context, and an-
nounced a policy to inform victims of that option.206 Further measures followed, such as the incorpora-
tion in the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines of an ex officio assessment against the B9 regulation 
in the asylum procedure.207

200 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, p. 17, action point 20.
201 Claessen, 2005.
202 NRM5, p. 80.
203 Parliamentary Documents II, 2008/09, 28 638, no. 41 and no. 44. See also NRM7, p. 165.
204 NRM1, recommendation 20
205 NRM3, recommendation 12.
206 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, p. 21.
207 Government Gazette 2010, 10228.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
54

The above recommendations have not led to legislation for victims beyond the B9 regulation, but there 
are still some possibilities in practice. When a victim who is unwilling or unable to cooperate requests 
a residence permit on humanitarian grounds, the Ministry of Justice will sometimes grant that request 
on the grounds of the discretionary power of ministers to depart from existing policy.208

2.5.2 Continued residence
Chapter B16/7 of the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000 contains rules for continued residence 
of aliens after the temporary B9 residence permit has expired. The regulation can be invoked if repa-
triation to the country of origin would have unacceptable consequences for the individual concerned 
and for his or her family. The Rapporteur has also made a number of recommendations concerning this 
regulation.

Cooperation and conviction
The regulation was originally intended only for victims who had reported trafficking. The Rapporteur 
concluded that, as in the case of the B9 regulation, the B16/7 regulation should apply in full to victims 
who had otherwise fully cooperated with the investigation and prosecution, and made a recommenda-
tion to this effect, and recommended accordingly.209 The Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines were 
amended as suggested.210

A condition for qualifying for continued residence in the original regulation was that the criminal pro-
ceedings had to result in a conviction for human trafficking. The assumption was that repatriation in 
that case would involve risks for the individual concerned. The Rapporteur said that there should also 
be a presumption in law that repatriation would involve those same risks if the victim reports human 
trafficking and human trafficking is included in the indictment, but the accused is convicted of another 
offence related to the human trafficking but not of human trafficking itself. The Rapporteur called for 
the inclusion of a provision in the regulation to the effect that there would be a presumption in law that 
the aforementioned risks would also apply in that case.211

The government also adopted this recommendation. The provision in the Aliens Act Implementation 
Guidelines actually goes even further, stating that there is a presumption that repatriation involves risks 
for a victim if the accused is convicted of any offence in an indictment that includes human trafficking.212

With this amendment of the B16/7 regulation, the primary responsibility for deciding whether a person 
is a victim has shifted from the judge to the public prosecutor, since a conviction for any other offence, 
even if the accused is acquitted of human trafficking, constitutes grounds for continued residence. The 
Rapporteur pointed out that the effect of this would be to leave victims in uncertainty about whether 
they will be granted continued residence for an unnecessarily long time, since it is already clear at the 
time of the decision to prosecute that he or she is already regarded as a victim by the public prosecution 

208 Letter of 18 October 2007 from the State Secretary of Justice to the Lower House of Parliament, Parlia-
mentary Documents II 2007/08, 19 637 no. 1174.. 

209 NRM5, recommendation 6.
210 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000, § B16/7, under a.
211 NRM5, recommendation 8.
212 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000, § B16/7, under b. The relationship with the human trafficking 

offence is therefore dropped.



Recommendations and developments
55

service.213 The Rapporteur therefore recommended bringing forward the time at which continued resi-
dence is granted under the B16/7 regulation from the time of conviction to the time of the decision to 
prosecute.214 She added that this practical amendment could also make victims more willing to report 
crimes with sufficient leads for a successful prosecution, adding that it would remain necessary to create 
guarantees to ensure that the victim remains available and willing to cooperate with the investigation 
and prosecution.
In the government’s response to this point, it said that the relevant chain partners were investigating 
how they could implement the recommendation to provide victims with certainty about their claim 
to continued residence as soon as possible without harming the interests of the investigation and 
prosecution. The Minister of Justice noted that he did not feel that granting a residence permit for an 
indefinite period was always the most appropriate instrument for that.215 In response, the Rapporteur 
repeated that it would be possible to grant a conditional residence permit and pointed out that, in 
practice, the decision to launch a prosecution almost always resulted in a residence permit being 
granted.216

The Rapporteur also recommended that the presumption that the repatriation of the victim involves 
risks if the traffickers concerned are convicted should be adopted not only for victims who have reported 
human trafficking but also for witnesses who have reported.217 The government has not yet responded 
to this recommendation.

Three-year period
The B16/7 regulation contains an additional ground for continued residence. As the rules that have ap-
plied since 14 August 2006 are formulated, an application could also be granted if the alien concerned 
had been living in the Netherlands for at least three years under a B9 permit at the time of the judgment. 
The idea behind this provision was that after three years, the most important humanitarian factor was 
the length of time the victim had lived here. The Rapporteur pointed out that as it was formulated, the 
rule did not entirely meet its purpose. Because the time of the judgment in the trial was decisive, and 
the length of criminal proceedings varies, it is impossible to ensure that victims who cooperate with 
the investigation and prosecution do not remain in uncertainty about their continued residence in the 
Netherlands for longer than three years.218 The Rapporteur recommended that the rules should express 
more clearly that after three years of residence under the B9 regulation, the length of time the victim 
has lived in the Netherlands constitutes the humanitarian grounds for approving an application for 
continued residence.219 This recommendation has been adopted.

213 NRM7, p. 574.
214 NRM7, recommendation 4.
215 Letter from the Minister of Justice, Reaction to the Seventh Report of the Rapporteur on Trafficking in 

Human Beings, 21 January 2010, Parliamentary Documents II, 2009/10, 28 638, no. 47, p. 6.
216 Letter from the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings to parliament’s Permanent Com-

mittee for Justice on the government’s reaction to the Seventh Report on Trafficking in Human Beings, 
10 February 2010. 

217 NRM7, recommendation 6.
218 NRM5, pp. 39-40.
219 NRM5, recommendation 9.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
56

Safe repatriation
Even if neither of the grounds in the B16/7 regulation applies, it remains important to enquire whether it 
would be sound to repatriate the victim to his or her country of origin. The Rapporteur has recommended 
that the applicant’s burden of proof should not be too onerous.220 Because the government may not send 
an alien back to the country of origin if that would create unacceptable risks for the safety of the alien or his 
or her relatives, the government has a duty to conduct an investigation that is sufficient to make a proper 
risk analysis. In the First report, the Rapporteur had already said that although repatriation of the victim to 
the country of origin might be an option, it is not enough to wait and see whether the alien concerned can 
show that repatriation involves unacceptable risks.221 In the Third report, the Rapporteur called for additi-
onal measures to prevent revictimisation and to protect them from reprisals by traffickers. The Rapporteur 
said that when, in specific cases, despite these measures the victim’s safety is not guaranteed, repatriation 
is unacceptable and the individual concerned should be allowed to stay longer in the Netherlands.222

The Rapporteur further remarked that sound policy on this point would give partners in the anti-traffic-
king chain the confidence not to advise victims against reporting humen trafficking.223 Increasing the 
resilience of victims and improving conditions in the country of origin are other factors that influence 
the likelihood of victims again falling victim to human traffickers. With that in mind, the Rapporteur 
recommended setting up programmes in the Netherlands to strengthen the position of victims and 
investing in improving conditions in countries of origin224 225.
In the NAP, the government said that efforts would be made to intensify international cooperation, 
through bilateral or multilateral agreements with countries of origin, for example, in order to facilitate 
safe repatriation.226 This principle is incorporated in various examples of international cooperation. For 
example, IOM Nederland has been involved in setting up referral mechanisms in the cities of Benin and 
Lagos in Nigeria since 2008. The purpose of this project227 (which started on 1 October 2008) is to identify 
the relevant social services and NGOs and draw up agreements with them for the reception of victims, 
both those identified locally and those who have returned from Western countries. The Netherlands 
also finances projects in Bulgaria and Romania to help these countries to expand and improve their 
reception facilities.228

In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur returned to the issue of the safety of victims who have been repa-
triated. She recommended that steps should be taken to ensure that earlier agreements to create security 
files so that repatriation can proceed in a responsible manner are actually implemented.229 Following 
this recommendation, IND officials notified the Rapporteur, among other things, that they would in-
vestigate the possibility of compiling a security file containing all the available information relating to 
any security aspects affecting the individual concerned and his or her family.

220 NRM5, recommendation 10.
221 NRM1, recommendation 11.
222 NRM3, recommendation 18.
223 NRM3, p. 162.
224 NRM1, recommendation 11.
225 See also § 2.3
226 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 37
227 NRM7, p. 153.
228 Appendix to Parliamentary Documents II 20008/09, 31 263, no. 27, pp. 114-115.
229 NRM7, recommendation 6.



Recommendations and developments
57

2.6	 Supervision,	enforcement	and	investigation	in	the	sex	industry

2.6.1 Supervision and enforcement

Abolition of national ban on brothels
With the reasoning that voluntary prostitution is a fact of life in society and therefore calls for a realistic 
approach and the objective of decriminalising the exploitation of prostitution, the national ban on 
brothels (Article 250bis of the Dutch Criminal Code) and the criminalisation of pimping (Article 432 of 
the Dutch Criminal Code) were abolished in 2000. The expectation was that licensed prostitution could 
be properly monitored and that the police should focus their attention mainly on illegal prostitution. 
Consequently, one of the Rapporteur’s very first recommendations concerning supervision and enfor-
cement was concerned with prostitution outside the licensed sector. The Rapporteur said that to tackle 
abuses in prostitution outside the legal sector a lot depended on the efforts of the police and the public 
prosecution service, which should focus more directly on active and alert investigation and prosecu-
tion of cases of human trafficking.230 In the Fifth report,231 the Rapporteur called, above all, for more 
intensive checks by the police in the illegal prostitution sector and for a clear and consistent approach 
to repressive enforcement in the licensed sector by municipalities.

The licensing requirement and the measures to clean up the prostitution sector following the abo-
lition of the ban on brothels have been evaluated twice. The second evaluation indicated that – in 
addition to licensed establishments and forms of prostitution that did not require a license – there 
was non-licensed (illegal) prostitution. However, the evaluation concluded that the legal prostitu-
tion sector was larger than the illegal sector.232 Another conclusion was that (in 2006) the licensing 
system was working properly almost everywhere and that everywhere controls were carried out 
to one extent or another, so that there were scarcely any so-called sanctuaries any longer.233 That 
seemed to indicate that the licence prostitution sector was being properly controlled.
This conclusion did not accurately reflect the true situation, as was shown by the Sneep case, for 
example, in which more than 100 women working in the licensed sector were found to have been for-
ced into prostitution, and also became apparent from the administrative report following that case.234

Supervision of the licensed sector therefore remained an area of concern.

Municipalities
When the ban on brothels was lifted, it was decided to opt for local regulation of legal forms of exploi-
tation of prostitution. The advantage of this approach was that municipalities could adopt their own 
policies in response to the local situation. However, there were also drawbacks. The Rapporteur has 
made a number of recommendations in relation to this issue in the last 10 years.
A number of the recommendations made in this context were aimed at harmonising municipal policy 
and improving the exchange of information between municipalities and other partners in the anti-
trafficking chain.

230 NRM1, recommendation 26.
231 NRM5, recommendation 15.
232 Daalder, 2007, p.73-74.
233 Daalder, 2007, p. 83.
234 Hout and Van der Laan, 2008.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
58

Harmonisation of policy
A national framework is needed to prevent waterbed effects. In this context, the Rapporteur recom-
mended that the central government should assume responsibility for prostitution policy.235 This 
recommendation was not adopted: primary responsibility for prostitution policy has remained with 
the local authorities in recent years. In the Fifth report, the Rapporteur recommended that every 
municipality should require escort agencies to have a licence and should adopt a general munici-
pal bye-law requiring them to have a permanent address with a permanent telephone number as a 
condition for receiving a licence.236 In this way, escort companies would be subject to the same rules 
everywhere. Although the proposal for the Act on the Regulation of Prostitution (see § 2.2.3) will 
create more uniformity in licensing conditions, it still leaves scope for differences. According to the 
bill, municipalities will have the possibility to opt for zero tolerance under certain conditions, me-
aning that municipalities can adopt bye-laws providing that no licences will be issued for prostitution 
businesses in the interests of protecting public order, the quality of life and the safety and health of 
prostitutes and clients.

Sharing information
To prevent the waterbed effect, the Third report237 also called for an enquiry into the extent to which 
administrative measures taken against a mala fide operator in one municipality could be used in assessing 
an application for a licence by the same operator in another municipality. The Rapporteur recommen-
ded that overviews of the results of administrative checks and any ensuing administrative interventions 
should be distributed nationally238 so that municipalities would have a single source of information 
about the status of a business.
Another recommendation was that municipalities should improve the provision of relevant informa-
tion to the police and the public prosecution service, and vice versa.239 The Rapporteur suggested that 
the Regional Information and Expertise Centres (RIECs)240 could help in this by serving as hubs for the 
distribution of information and as centres of expertise for all the relevant partners.241

The Task Force on Human Trafficking242 also devoted attention to improving the exchange of informa-
tion at local and national level in its action plan. The progress report on the action plan showed that a 

235 NRM3, recommendation 37.
236 NRM5, recommendation 16.
237 NRM3, recommendation 34.
238 NRM3, recommendation 33.
239 NRM7, recommendation 10.
240 See www.riecnet.nl (consulted on 23 August 2010) and NRM7, pp. 261-263.
241 The centres of expertise should operate at a supra-regional level in order to prevent waterbed effects 

and to collect and distribute information at the national level. At the same time, the centres of exper-
tise should respond adequately to regional needs. To optimise the match with the regional require-
ments, it was decided not to prescribe a uniform embedding model but to allow the RIECs to decide 
on their own structure. There will be a review at the end of the pilot phase to assess whether a uniform 
structure is required after all (Source: Administrative Approach to Organised Crime Programme, ap-
pendix to Parliamentary Documents II 2007/08, 29911, no. 11, pp. 5-7; information receive verbally from the 
project manager of the Administrative Approach to Organised Crime Programme, 3 April 2009). 

242 Task Force on Human Trafficking, 2009a, measure 2. 



Recommendations and developments
59

number of ‘quick wins’ had been achieved in relation to the exchange of information.243 For example, a 
tool kit entitled the Guide to Chain Direction and administrative supervision in the licensed prostitution 
sector244 had been produced for agencies involved in controlling, investigating and prosecuting human 
trafficking and providing shelter for victims. The tool kit contained instructions on how to record indi-
cations of human trafficking and on the conditions under which information can be shared with other 
agencies. The National Police Intelligence Service (IPOL) of the National Police Services Agency (KLPD) 
had also conducted a study into the bottlenecks in the exchange of information between the police 
service’s Centre of Expertise on Human Trafficking and Migrant Smuggling (EMM), the regional police 
forces and the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee. The results of that study were not entirely positive 
with regard to the sharing of information by these agencies and the role of the EMM.245 In a speech to 
a conference entitled ‘The approach of municipalities to human trafficking’ on 17 February 2010, the 
Rapporteur urged partners in the chain to cooperate and stressed that municipalities have a primary task 
in efforts to combat human trafficking.246

The action plan also reported that a pilot project designed to link the RIECs and the EMM had started. The 
aim of this project is to improve the exchange of information and explore how the various parties in the 
chain can share the information they have and when they are permitted to do so. During the project, the 
parties will also experiment with producing administrative reports and improving their professionalism.

Supervising the escort sector
Supervision of the escort sector is complex because it is not bound to a specific location. Operators of 
businesses and prostitutes can quickly move from one municipality to another. Their elusiveness is 
reinforced by flexible means of communication, which can sometimes make it difficult to identify the 
individuals behind a business.
Since the First report, the Rapporteur has warned of the difficulty of identifying human trafficking in 
the escort sector. The exclusion of the sector from the licensing system means that no administrative 
control can be exercised over it. Accordingly, the Rapporteur has expressed concern about the pos-
sibility of the banned variants of the exploitation of prostitution becoming rooted in this sector.247 
In the Third report, the Rapporteur said that attempts were being made, as part of the Handhaven op 
Niveau project, to develop an effective system of enforcement and sanctions for the escort sector. As 
part of that effort the ‘hotel room procedure’ (also known as ‘supervision via appointment’) was 
developed. This method involves making an appointment with a prostitute from an escort agency in 
order to check whether the agency’s manager is complying with the terms of the licence.248 The Third 
report said that if the instrument of administrative control was not effective enough in this sector, or 
placed extreme demands on available capacity, a simpler system of regulation and control should be 

243 Task Force on Human Trafficking, 2009b.
244 Hendriks and Corsel, 2009.
245 NRM7, p. 282.
246 Conference on prostitution policy 2008, organised by the municipality of The Hague in association with 

the Hague Prostitution Platform and management consultancy De Beuk, 7 February 2008. Proceedings 
(Wat weten we, wat willen we, wat doen we?) available online at www.prostitutiebeleid2008.nl.

247 NRM1, recommendation 23.
248 NRM3, § 5.4.2.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
60

considered.249 One of the recommendations in the Fifth report250 was that all municipalities should 
require escort companies to be licensed. It also251 included a recommendation to investigate how 
effective supervision could be exercised over sex businesses where both paid and unpaid sex occurs, 
such as couples’ clubs. The Fifth252 and Seventh253 reports also called for control of non-location-
bound prostitution by developing new methods and hiring experts in electronic media (because of 
the growing importance of the internet and the need to monitor sites where prostitutes advertise 
their services).254 Although the Rapporteur was positive about the impact of the ‘hotel procedure’ in 
the Fifth report, in the Seventh report she noted that its impact was weakening because operators had 
become familiar with the procedure and could therefore easily evade it.

Under the proposal for the Act on the Regulation of Prostitution, escort businesses would, like all sex 
businesses, be required to have a licence. Insofar as the introduction of the act would make the supervi-
sion and control of the escort sector more effective, it would also implement some of the Rapporteur’s 
recommendations.

Cooperation in the chain
A chain approach is an approach that makes use of the powers and instruments available to different 
partners. In the context of combating human trafficking, a chain approach combines prevention, iden-
tification, the provision of help, investigation and prosecution. In 2009, municipalities had not yet all 
adopted a chain approach.255 Part of the reason for this was that not all municipalities perceived human 
trafficking as a problem.
In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur recommended that municipalities should take the initiative to 
adopt a chain approach towards human trafficking, under the direction of a specific official, suggesting 
that smaller municipalities could cooperate with larger municipalities if necessary.256 There was already 
good cooperation in the chain in some large cities. One example is the city of Rotterdam, where 10 
parties signed an agreement on 4 February 2009 to adopt a chain approach to human trafficking. The 
partners agreed to intensify cooperation and share information about every aspect of the criminal in-
vestigation of human trafficking. The municipality of Rotterdam is one of the partners and the chain 
director is from that municipality. The electronic exchange of data and the creation of files have been 

249 NRM3, recommendation 38.
250 NRM5, recommendation 16.
251 NRM5, recommendation 17.
252 NRM5, recommendation 16. ‘It is recommended that every municipality should impose a licensing re-

quirement on escort businesses and make it a condition of granting a licence in the General Municipal 
Ordinance that escort businesses must have a fixed address (with a fixed telephone number) where they 
keep their day-to-day records, including staffing records.’  

253 NRM7, recommendation 29 
254 An instrument that could be helpful in this respect is a multimedia agreement (analogous to the agree-

ment on erotic advertisements) obliging sex businesses to report their licence number and place of 
establishment in the advertisement. However, this instrument is only useful if the information is veri-
fied. Another option might be to require these sex businesses to have a permanent telephone number.

255 NRM7, p. 287.
256 NRM7, recommendation 7.



Recommendations and developments
61

intensified to improve efforts (criminal, fiscal and administrative) to catch perpetrators. The agreement 
also covers the provision of care and shelter for victims of human trafficking.257

Following on from these measures, the Rapporteur also called for the adoption of a comprehensive 
approach, particularly with a view to ensuring the effectiveness of measures to tackle human trafficking 
in the sex industry.258 Such an approach would no longer be confined to tightening up scrutiny of the 
licensed prostitution sector for human trafficking (for example, by devoting time to building up a rela-
tionship of trust with the prostitutes working in the sector and through persistent questioning in the 
event of indications of human trafficking), but would also simultaneously address illegal prostitution. 
Another element of such an approach would be clear agreements on the allocation of tasks between the 
police and the municipalities.

The police
The Police Monitor (2008)259 describes the efforts made by the different police forces to combat human 
trafficking, and the methods and degree of cooperation of cooperation between the various forces and 
the other partners in the chain. The monitor is written by the police and contains a degree of self-
reflection that few other partners in the chain have imitated to date.
The Police Monitor showed that the police had still not adequately controlled the licensed prostitution 
sector in 2008. The monitor also showed that supervising the non-licensed sector made huge demands 
on resources and that most forces had only carried out occasional or reactive checks. Following the 
publication of the Police Monitor, the holder of the portfolio for human trafficking, migrant smuggling 
and other forms of exploitation for the police informed the Minister of Justice of the improvements the 
police intended to make in response to the monitor to improve efforts to combat human trafficking. 
He informed the minister that the Police Monitor 2010, which is due to appear in April 2011, would 
incorporate the results of the planned improvements.

2.6.2 Investigation
In the First report, the Rapporteur said that investigations of human trafficking should not rely solely 
on information from a victim’s report. The threshold for making a statement or report the crime is 
often very high for a victim. Information should be gathered far more widely. A more information-led 
investigation would be helpful, as would information from other investigations.260

257 The agreement was signed by the Rotterdam-Rijnmond police region, the Rotterdam district office of 
the public prosecution service, the tax authorities in Rijnmond, the Prostitution Social Work depart-
ment of Stichting Humanitas, the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment (the Social Intelligence 
and Investigation Service and the Labour Inspectorate), the Central Agency for the Reception of Asylum 
Seekers, the Child Care Agency, the Probation Service and the municipality of Rotterdam (the Urban 
Development and Housing Department, the municipal health service, the Public Affairs department, 
the Social Affairs and Employment department and the Security department). 

258 NRM7, recommendation 9.
259 Police Monitor 2008; the monitor was published in 2009 and contained information about 2008.
260 NRM1, recommendation 7.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
62

Financial investigations
Financial investigations261 are one way of preventing investigations from relying too much on statements 
by victims. Financial investigations make optimal use of know-how and the methods and techniques 
of conducting financial, economic and administrative enquiries.NRM5 These investigations can help the 
authorities to discover the origin and destination of illegally earned income and to gather evidence.262 
At the same time, they can reveal links between members of a criminal network and might identify as-
sets that can be confiscated.263

Since the First report, the Rapporteur has been highlighting the need for investigations into money 
flows, the confiscation of illegal earnings and for financial investigations in general,264 and drew at-
tention to the issue again in the Third265 and Fifth266 reports. In the Fifth report, the Rapporteur also 
mentioned the importance of financial investigations for identifying facilitators, international criminal 
organisations and their contacts in the legitimate business world. The Seventh report267 mentioned that 
financial investigations are almost always conducted in human trafficking cases.

Programmatic approach
This is an approach used to tackle organised crime.268 Human trafficking is one of the areas where the ap-
proach is being developed in pilot projects, which also address new manifestations of exploitation in the 
sex industry, such as forced prostitution in hotels.269 One of the features of the programmatic approach 
is that it involves a joint effort by the criminal and administrative authorities at local and national level. 
The aim of this broad cooperation at different levels is not only to prosecute perpetrators and conscious 
facilitators, but also to identify underlying ad hoc structures and structural factors that (consciously or 
otherwise) facilitate organised crime. This is done using the so-called ‘barrier model’, which describes 
the obstacles that organised criminal organisations have to overcome to commit a criminal offence. The 
five barriers are entry, housing, identity, work and finance. The Action Plan of the Task Force on Human 
Trafficking said that the barrier model was used in all pilot projects relating to human trafficking in 
2010270. The programmatic approach was used for the first time on an experimental basis in the Sneep 
investigation in 2006. To involve the chain partners in the case, the public prosecution service and the 
police gave presentations and media briefings about the scale and the violent nature of this human 
trafficking gang, which had been able to operate freely for years. The approach worked: almost all of 
the partners became convinced that it was a serious social problem and expressed a willingness to help 
combat it.

261 The Police Monitor 2008 reflected on the financial investigations conducted by the police. It said that 
at least one section of a case file should be devoted to the financial aspects of the case. 

262 Secherling and Nelen, 1997, p. 3.
263 At a later stage, financial investigations are also relevant for claims for compensation by victims. 
264 NRM1, recommendation 5.
265 NRM3, recommendation 47.
266 NRM5, recommendation 47.
267 NRM7, recommendation 38.
268 Programme to Strengthen the Approach to Combating Organised Crime, appendix to Parliamentary 

Documents 2007/08, 29 911, no. 10, pp. 1, 5-9, 15-18. See also NRM7, pp. 282-284. 
269 Mensenhandel onverminderd hoge prioriteit, Public Prosecution Service, Annual Report 2009, p.5
270 Task Force on Human Trafficking, 2009b, p. 15



Recommendations and developments
63

2.6.3 Police capacity
The Rapporteur has repeatedly recommended making more resources available to investigate human 
trafficking.271 Without additional capacity, the efforts to combat human trafficking, as one of the many 
designated priorities, could not receive sufficient attention and resources. The government had earlier 
said that the police should intensify efforts to investigate and combat human trafficking.272 That could 
only be done with the allocation of additional resources.273

The police originally assigned human trafficking to their vice and juvenile crime teams. Since comba-
ting human trafficking requires specialist know-how, the Rapporteur called early on for the creation 
of dedicated human trafficking teams. In the Seventh report,274 the Rapporteur highlighted the need 
for every force to adopt the police’s own reference framework on human trafficking, which lays down 
standards for investigation and enforcement. She also recommended that every police force should have 
a specialist human trafficking team.
In 2009, some of the regional police forces had specialist human trafficking teams. The Police Monitor 
2008 said that many forces had measures in place to guarantee efforts to investigate and combat human 
trafficking; nevertheless, it described as problematic the fact that forces did not all possess or deploy 
the same level of resources to carry out all the tasks relating to human trafficking. The Police Monitor 
also said that there was a gap between the reality on paper and what happened in practice: although 
human trafficking was a priority for almost every force, in practice other not unimportant matters often 
received priority.275

On the basis of the public prosecution service’s annual report for 2009, the chairman of the Council of 
Procurators General commented: ‘The available information must lead to the conclusion that a lot of 
cases are ‘shelved’ by detectives. It is not possible for the investigative services and the public prosecution 
service to deal with all criminal offences and their perpetrators with the available manpower and resour-
ces.’ The report showed that the criminal intelligence divisions, in particular, already faced a shortage of 
detectives to investigate and prosecute every known or suspected crime. This is especially a problem in 
the case of complex investigations of offences such as child pornography and organised crime, including 
human trafficking, according to the same article. 276

The Police Monitor 2008 further reported that the police were not always compensated for the work they 
performed for municipalities.277 Several regional forces had received additional resources in the form 
of financing from municipalities for one or more FTEs but, according to the Police Monitor, the police 
desperately needed additional capacity to achieve the goals that were set. Securing additional capacity 
depended, it was suggested, on the importance municipalities attach to tackling human trafficking.

In a reaction to the draft Act on the Regulation of Prostitution, the Rapporteur referred to the fact that 
it did not make any provision for expanding capacity, adding that the proposal also said nothing about 

271 NRM3, recommendation 36.
272 NRM3, recommendation 42: ‘The priority the police give to human trafficking at the policy level must 

also be reflected in practice by all regional forces.’
273 NRM3, recommendation 63.
274 NRM7, recommendation 26.
275 Police Monitor 2008, pp. 154, 156.
276 Baas OM waarschuwt voor afname veiligheid, De Pers, Thursday 27 May 2010. See also § 2.8.1.
277 Police Monitor 2008, p. 143.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
64

the allocation of tasks between the local authority and the police. If nothing is agreed, it is likely that 
checking licences will be mainly a task for the police – with the ensuing risk that the police will become 
overburdened.278 The memorandum of amendment to the law later included a provision that supervi-
sion would be carried out by officials designated by the municipality and not by police officers.279

The activities of human traffickers are not confined to a particular region. Investigations and measures 
to combat human trafficking must therefore also transcend regional boundaries. Accordingly, in the 
First report, the Rapporteur specifically called for the creation of capacity to address human trafficking 
at the national level.280 This recommendation has become even more urgent, particularly as a result 
of changes in the non-location-bound prostitution sector. In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur also 
referred to the problems that polices force can face with the ‘shopping around’ of human trafficking 
investigations and recommended measures to prevent this.281 The Rapporteur has also made repeated 
calls for international cooperation.

2.6.4 Prohibiting the tolerance of human trafficking

In April 2006, the National Office of the public prosecution service and the National Criminal Intel-
ligence Service launched the investigation codenamed Sneep. In this investigation a number of 
investigative agencies targeted a group of human traffickers who were operating at various loca-
tions in the Netherlands. For years, the group had been violently exploiting more than 100 women 
in window prostitution.282

A number of agencies professionally involved in identifying and combating human trafficking had 
been aware of the group for years. After a warning to the police at the Beursstraat station in Am-
sterdam in 1998, investigations had taken place in 2000 and 2003, but they had not ended the 
group’s criminal activities. Further complaints were made in 2004 and 2005 by victims and by as-
sociates or competitors of the group.283 The first arrests were made in February 2007.

The Sneep case (see above in § 2.6.1) demonstrated that victims had remained in a situation of exploita-
tion without any direct intervention, despite the fact that tolerance of human trafficking is absolutely 
forbidden284 (meaning that if human trafficking is suspected, the police and the public prosecution ser-
vice may never allow an offence to continue if that prevents victims being removed from their situation). 

278 Input of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings for the roundtable discussion of the 
Act to regulate prostitution and combat abuses in the sex industry, Letter from the National Rapporteur 
on Trafficking in Human Beings to the members of parliament’s Permanent Committee for the Interior 
and Kingdom Relations and Permanent Committee for Justice, 11 December 2009, p.6. 

279 Parliamentary Documents II 2009/10, 32 211, no. 9.
280 NRM1, recommendation 9.
281 NRM7, recommendation 28.
282 Hout and Van der Laan, 2008, p. 10.
283 Hout and Van der Laan, 2008, p. 39.
284 Parliament adopted the Rouvoet motion on tolerating known offences in November 1998. It encom-

passed a total ban on allowing offences to continue; in other words, it is not even acceptable in the 
interests of a major investigation. (Rouvoet motion, Parliamentary Documents II 1998/1999, 25 402, no. 
30).



Recommendations and developments
65

Even the interests of a major investigation, such as efforts to identify and arrest the leaders of a criminal 
organisation and to discover how they operate, does not remove that obligation.285

The recommendation in the First report286 to conduct a new and broader review of the scope and impact 
of the Rouvoet motion for the legal practice was repeated in the Third287 and Fifth reports.288 In the Se-
venth report, the Rapporteur warned of the risk that the police would increasingly face the dilemma of 
being aware of offences but being unable to intervene in a human trafficking situation because of a lack 
of capacity, notwithstanding the fact that the ban on tolerating human trafficking situations is intended 
to protect victims from that.289 Although the ban prescribes that every indication of human trafficking 
must be immediately investigated, in practice a human trafficking case might be set aside (by the ‘case 
review committee’, for example) in favour of other priority cases (serious vice cases or major drug cases, 
for example) or it might take some time to start an investigation.290 Consequently, the absolute ban 
does not always seem to be applied in practice. The recommendation in the First report has therefore 
lost none of its relevance.

2.7	 Training,	awareness	and	identification

2.7.1 Introduction
It is usually not easy to identify human trafficking. Possible victims of human trafficking often do not 
clearly convey the message that they are victims. Situations of human trafficking are not always easy to 
recognise. Hence the growing importance that many organisations, the police in particular, attach to 
recognising situations of human trafficking.
The most important factor in identifying human trafficking is to know the signs. Training is provided to 
professionals to help improve their ability to identify those signs. The general public can also play an im-
portant role in identifying human trafficking. Accordingly, the Rapporteur has made numerous recom-
mendations concerning training for professionals and to increase public awareness of the phenomenon.

2.7.2 Training of professionals
Because it is so important for the various partners in the anti-trafficking chain to have sufficient know-
ledge of how to combat human trafficking, the Rapporteur’s reports have included recommendations 
for training and education in relation to human trafficking for various target groups. Most of those 
recommendations were intended to equip professionals to recognise and respond adequately to indi-
cations of human trafficking. The National Action Plan on Human Trafficking (NAP) also addressed the 

285 Van Gestel and Verhoeven, 2009. 
286 NRM1, recommendation 25.
287 NRM3, recommendation 62.
288 NRM5, recommendation 46.
289 NRM7, p. 315.
290 NRM7, p. 322. For the Seventh report, the Rapporteur conducted research into ‘shelved cases’, partly 

because the existence of such cases is totally inconsistent with the priority given to human trafficking 
by the government, the police and the public prosecution service, as well as the ban on tolerating 
human trafficking.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
66

issue of the recognition of indications of human trafficking by professionals and the training in the 
relevant agencies.291

Identification
There are numerous signs that can indicate human trafficking. Briefly, they can include multiple depen-
dency on another person (the employer), serious restriction of an individual’s basic freedoms, very poor 
working conditions and violation of a person’s physical integrity.292 Employees of organisations that 
might be confronted with victims of human trafficking should, ideally, be aware of these indications 
and know where they should report relevant information.
But that has not always been the case. In the First report,293 the Rapporteur referred to the possibility 
of a more consistent, effective and proactive approach to searching for signs of human trafficking and 
responding to them. Efforts to tackle human trafficking had to start with a mind open to the signs of 
human trafficking, and any indications should, in any case, lead to an investigation and, if possible, a 
prosecution. At the time, the recommendation applied only to human trafficking with a view to sexual 
exploitation. In 2005, exploitation outside the sex industry (‘other forms of exploitation’) also became 
a criminal offence, and efforts to identify exploitation had to be expanded accordingly, since without 
identification of these forms of exploitation there was less chance that the offence would actually be 
prosecuted. The Third report therefore recommended drawing up a list of indications of other forms of 
exploitation using the existing list of signs of human trafficking for sexual exploitation as a guideline.294

In the Fifth report the Rapporteur advised relevant organisations to be attentive for signs of human 
trafficking, particularly where it might involve vulnerable groups such as children living illegally in the 
Netherlands and persons with a mild mental handicap. Another recommendation was to involve orga-
nisations that worked with vulnerable children in efforts to identify and provide assistance for underage 
victims without a residence permit, including helping them to report crimes. One suggestion was to 
formulate and disseminate a standard procedure for protecting those vulnerable groups.295

The same report referred to the progress made in identifying and providing assistance to possible victims 
of human trafficking in aliens detention. The report said that this issue should continue to receive at-
tention, but added the important recommendation of being particularly alert for male victims of human 
trafficking in aliens detention.296

In the Seventh report, the Rapporteur remarked that the identification of other forms of exploitation by 
all the relevant agencies needed to improve 297. The Labour Inspectorate (in the workplace), the Social 
Intelligence and Investigation Service (SIOD) (in the workplace), the police and Royal Netherlands Ma-
rechaussee (when aliens are arrested), the Immigration and Naturalisation Service (during the asylum 

291 For example, see action point 19 in the National Action Plan on Human Trafficking: ‘Distribute a list 
of possible indications of human trafficking widely among agencies that may come into contact with 
(victims of ) human trafficking. Include the subject of human trafficking in the training programmes 
of these agencies where possible.’

292 For an extensive list, see the Instructions on Human Trafficking of the public prosecution service, 
Government Gazette 2008, 253, appendix 3.

293 NRM1, recommendation 8.
294 NRM3, recommendation 55. 
295 NRM5, recommendation 30.
296 NRM5, recommendation 31.
297 NRM7, recommendation 12.



Recommendations and developments
67

procedure) and the Repatriation & Departure Service (during aliens detention), in particular, could be 
expected to be proactive in questioning possible victims and otherwise searching for signs of human 
trafficking.

Identification of victims who are also offenders
In the Seventh report the Rapporteur called on the Child Protection Council and youth care services 
to be alert to signs of human trafficking, for example with regard to possible victims of lover-
boys and to victims among Roma children, and in making recommendations on sentencing of 
underage victims as offenders.298 This last recommendation arose from BNRM’s study into the 
non-punishment principle.299 This study explored the problems of victims of human trafficking 
who have themselves committed a criminal offence in connection with the situation of exploita-
tion. Because they are also offenders, these persons are not always recognised as victims. Nor are 
the agencies that deal with these victims primarily concerned with recognising signs that a person 
may be a victim of human trafficking. The fact that victims can also be offenders complicates the 
task of recognising the signs.

Besides identification, another recurring objective of the recommendations that have been made has 
been to have the treatment of victims included in the training of professionals.300 Other recommen-
dations have been concerned with ensuring that agencies keep their know-how up to date and with 
promoting awareness within organisations of the tasks and duties of their partners in the chain. The 
NAP also addresses the need to embed information about the operating methods and profiles of lover-
boys in the training of police and public prosecutors.301 A noteworthy point in the NAP’s action list on 
training is that it repeatedly mentions that training courses should devote special attention to human 
trafficking in children.302

Training of police
The police are often the first to come in contact with victims of human trafficking, as well as being the 
agency that generally investigates cases of human trafficking. It is therefore crucial for the police to have 
a thorough knowledge of the offence, of the procedures for investigating it and of how victims should 
be treated. A logical conclusion is that investigating officers should be given training in how to deal with 
human trafficking. Even before the publication of the First report, human trafficking was covered in a 
training course provided in some police regions. The aim of the course was to train investigating officers 
in how to give evidence before a court, and used a human trafficking case as a model.NRM1 Since 2004, 
the training programme for detectives has included a specific module on human trafficking,NRM3 which 
is broader and includes sections on conducting intake interviews, recording reports and interviewing 
witnesses, carrying out checks and document verification. Although the original courses for the police 
were mainly concerned with sexual exploitation, a course in migration-related crime was developed for 
the aliens police in 2009. One of the aims of this course is to enable participants to recognise and deal 
adequately with cases of other forms of exploitation and the victims. It is noteworthy that the subject of 

298 NRM7, recommendation 14.
299 NRM7, chapter 6.
300 NRM7, recommendation 18.
301 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 15.
302 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action points 6 and 42.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
68

other forms of exploitation is included in the course on ‘migration-related crime’ since other forms of 
exploitation are not, by their nature or manifestation, necessarily related to migration. Of the 18 cases 
involving other forms of exploitation brought before the courts between January 2005 and June 2010, 
six involved only Dutch victims and therefore no element of migration.

Certification
The Instructions on Human Trafficking issued by the Council of Procurators General state that vic-
tims must be interviewed by competent officers who have been trained in interviewing victims of 
human trafficking.303 The Instructions on Human Trafficking also state that officers who interview 
victims of forced prostitution and victims of other forms of exploitation should preferably also be 
certified.304

A problem that arises from these instructions is that some police forces, but also other partners in 
the chain (such as the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee and the SIOD) have a shortage of qualified 
personnel.305 Consequently, certified officers are not always immediately available and conse-
quently victims of human trafficking cannot always be interviewed immediately.

Public prosecution service and the judiciary
There have been repeated calls in international documents for training for all officials and individuals 
involved in tackling human trafficking. Accordingly, in the Third report the Rapporteur highlighted the 
need for officials to possess an adequate level of knowledge and to refresh it regularly. The Rapporteur 
recommended establishing a permanent structure for training and education for both the public pro-
secution service and the judiciary.306 The judiciary, in particular, should devote more attention to deve-
loping knowledge and expertise on the subject of human trafficking, according to the Fifth report.307

In the Fifth report, the Rapporteur also recommended an evaluation of whether human trafficking 
should be an area of specialisation within the judiciary,308 arguing that specialisation in human traf-
ficking cases and concentrating cases with particular judges would certainly improve the quality of the 
administration of justice. After all, human trafficking is a complex offence and knowledge and expertise 
in the field needs to be consolidated and safeguarded. The findings from the study of the case-law in 
the Seventh report then led to the recommendation that there should also be judges that specialise in 
human trafficking and that, given the annual number of cases, ways should be found of retaining the 
accumulated expertise.309

303 This condition was included in the Instructions on Human Trafficking, Government Gazette 2006, 231 and 
was left unchanged in the Instructions on Human Trafficking, Government Gazette, 2008, 253.

304 This element was also included in the Instructions on Human Trafficking, Government Gazette 2006, 231 
and has remained unchanged in the Instructions on Human Trafficking.

305 See NRM7, pp. 316 and 328.
306 NRM3, recommendation 56. The public prosecution service had already been providing a one-off 

course for public prosecutors and their support staff since 2003.
307 NRM5, recommendation 56.
308 NRM5, recommendation 57.
309 NRM7, recommendation 39. It emerged, for example, that the district offices in Assen, Dordrecht and 

Middelburg registered the smallest number of cases between 2000 and 2008. These three office each 
accounted for just 1% of cases and, like Maastricht and Zutphen, never appeared in the top five district 
over the nine-year period, see § 3.4.1.



Recommendations and developments
69

One of the measures in the action plan of the Task Force on Human Trafficking relates to increasing 
the knowledge and expertise of the public prosecution service and of the judiciary.310 In its response 
to the recommendations in the Seventh report, the government said that this measure had already 
led to the inclusion of a basic and an advanced course on human trafficking in the programme of the 
Study Centre for the Judiciary (SSR) in 2009 and that this programme was open to both prosecutors 
and judges.311 This is an advanced version of an existing course on human trafficking. According to 
the Rapporteur, a course embracing the entire spectrum of human trafficking should be developed for 
the public prosecution service and the judiciary, which should also include what the SSR refers to as 
professional meetings.312

Although the SSR’s courses are also open to judges, the Rapporteur observed that judges only participa-
ted in them occasionally.NRM7 Only two judges attended the SSR course on human trafficking in 2009.313 
The participation by members of the judiciary in courses on human trafficking therefore remains a point 
of concern. There was a slight increase in the number of judges participating in the SSR courses in 2010. 
Several courts have also given short internal courses on human trafficking.

In its reaction to the Seventh report, the government said that the judiciary had not yet taken any steps 
to make human trafficking an area of specialisation. The minister felt, however, that specialist judges 
ought to be assigned to human trafficking.
The public prosecution service has already taken a number of measures to increase its knowledge and 
expertise. They are set out in Strengthening the approach to combating human trafficking and migrant 
smugglingNRM7 and include treating human trafficking as an area of specialisation in regional offices and 
the adopting a system of certification.

European database with case-law on human trafficking
Another potentially useful tool for legal practitioners might be a systematic method of searching for 
relevant case-law. Caselex is an electronic database of judicial decisions in various areas of law connec-
ted with European legislation (directives, treaties and international agreements). It contains selected 
judgments of both the highest national courts and the European Court of Justice. At the moment, the 
database contains no criminal case-law, and therefore, no judgments on human trafficking. The Rap-
porteur supports the idea of creating a database of case-law on human trafficking within the existing 
Caselex system, which would allow judges, public prosecution services, police, lawyers, policy makers 
and other professional legal groups to find relevant jurisprudence from other countries. After all, nati-
onal legislation and case-law on human trafficking is based on the same international sources, such as 
the UN Palermo Protocol (2000), the EU Framework Decision on Trafficking in Human Beings (2002) and 
the Council of Europe’s Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (2005).

310 Task Force on Human Trafficking, 2009b, measure 9.
311 Letter from the Minister of Justice, Reaction to the Seventh Report of the National Rapporteur on Traf-

ficking in Human Beings, 21 January 2010, Parliamentary Documents II 2009./10, 28 638, no. 47.
312 NRM7, recommendation 19.
313 Memorandum on human trafficking by the judiciary, submitted for information purposes to the mee-

ting of the Task Force in May 2010.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
70

SIOD and the Labour Inspectorate
Other agencies that provide training on human trafficking are the Social Intelligence and Investigation 
Service (SIOD) and the Labour Inspectorate. The courses are designed to help officials of these agencies 
to identify other forms of exploitation.314 In April 2010, the SIOD started a new course on human traffic-
king for 18 SIOD investigators, a specialist from the Labour Inspectorate and an employee of CoMensha. 
The course was developed in association with the International Centre for Migration Policy Development 
(ICMPD) with a view to enhancing the skills of officials of the SIOD and Labour Inspectorate in iden-
tifying and dealing with (potential) victims of human trafficking.315 At the time of writing, it was not 
known whether this course would be certified.

Training for the entire chain
Whereas in earlier reports the Rapporteur’s recommendations were concerned exclusively with training 
for specific target groups, the Seventh report also drew attention to the need for training across the en-
tire anti-trafficking chain. The Rapporteur recommended, for example, that employees of every agency 
that could be confronted with other forms of exploitation should receive training in how to recognise 
signs of human trafficking and how to deal with victims.316 The report also mentioned the importance 
of repeating the courses and giving them for new employees. For the first time, this report also recom-
mended organising joint training courses for different agencies.317

Another recommendation relating to the entire chain in the Seventh report was recommendation 20, 
which called for permanent attention for the problem of victims of human trafficking who are also sus-
pects (the non-punishment principle),318 for example by including the subject in the courses and training 
provided for all of the partners in the chain. In its reaction to the Seventh report, the government said 
that the public prosecution service will evaluate the scope for improvement in the application of the 
non-punishment principle, for example by formulating additional rules for the application of the prin-
ciple and incorporating them in the Instructions on Human Trafficking and in the training, the internal 
work processes and the cooperation between partners.319

2.7.3 Public awareness
It is not only professionals who are involved in combating human trafficking in the course of their work 
that play a role in preventing this offence. The public can also play an important role in preventing, 
identifying and combating human trafficking. The general public is still not fully aware of the nature 
and manifestations of human trafficking. Although human trafficking, forced prostitution and loverboys 
are all familiar terms, partly because of media attention, for many people human trafficking is still a 
very remote concept and something they believe could not occur in their circles. There are also miscon-

314 For more information about courses followed by officials of the Labour Inspectorate and the SIOD, see 
NRM7, pp. 516-518.

315 Information received in writing from the SIOD, 9 March 2010.
316 NRM7, recommendation 18.
317 NRM7, recommendation 18. A specific recommendation was that joint training for the Labour Inspec-

torate and the aliens police could help to increase their awareness of each other’s powers and duties 
and of their respective roles when potential victims of forms of exploitation outside the sex industry 
are discovered.

318 For a detailed description of this problem, see NRM7, Chapter 6. 
319 Parliamentary Documents II 2009/10, 28 638, no. 47, p. 11.



Recommendations and developments
71

ceptions about the distinction between human trafficking and migrant smuggling,320 and the notion 
of exploitation outside the sex industry is still unknown to many people. Human trafficking can openly 
occur because many people do not know precisely what human trafficking encompasses and how it can 
be recognised. It is therefore vital to increase public awareness of the offence in order to tackle human 
trafficking more effectively.

Public awareness and the role of the media
Although BNRM has not researched the scale of media attention to human trafficking, it seems 
that reporting on it has increased in recent years. Major human trafficking cases such as Sneep 
and Koolvis, in particular (but also the charges of exploitation of workers on an asparagus farm in 
Someren in 2009), have been widely covered in the press.321 The extensive reporting of these cases 
has contributed to wider public awareness of human trafficking.
That the media reporting has not been confined to background information is apparent from the 
enormous media attention for the flight of the convicted human trafficker Saban B. in September 
2009.322 The commotion that arose after a television programme by investigative reporter Peter 
R. de Vries323 and the publication of the book Echte mannen eten wél kaas324 calling into question 
the truthfulness of the autobiography by Maria Mosterd325 also highlighted the media and public 
interest in the subject of human trafficking.

Although organising public-awareness campaigns on human trafficking is not a core task or responsibi-
lity of the Rapporteur, she does help to increase public awareness of the problem by giving lectures and 
media interviews. An exception is also being made this year when, to mark the 10th anniversary of the 
establishment of the post of National Rapporteur, BNRM will put on the exhibition called Journey in The 
Hague. The exhibition is a vehicle to create and increase awareness of human trafficking.

Journey will be exhibited on the Plein in The Hague from 14-24 October 2010. The exhibition gives the 
general public a unique opportunity to learn about the nature and impact of human trafficking. The 
exhibition will also reach a wider target group, including people who have no professional or personal 
involvement in tackling human trafficking. Within that group there are potential victims (of loverboys 
for example), potential young offenders, as well as consumers, clients of prostitutes, employers and 

320 The criminal offence of people smuggling (Article 197a of the Dutch Criminal Code) involves assis-
ting, for motives of pecuniary or other gain, another person in gaining entry to the Netherlands or in 
remaining in the Netherlands. This is an offence against the territorial integrity of a state and that is the 
central interest. By contrast with people smuggling, the use of coercion and the intention of exploita-
tion are, in principle, necessary to meet the terms of the definition of human trafficking (Article 273f 
of the Dutch Criminal Code). Human trafficking is, by definition and in essence, a serious violation of 
the human rights and the personal integrity of the trafficked person, which is not the case with people 
smuggling.

321 These cases are discussed at length in NRM7.
322 For example, see Mensenhandelaar Saban B. is spoorloos, NRC Handelsblad, 16 September 2009 and Saban 

B. ontsnapte doordat rechters slapen, Trouw, 17 September 2009.
323 SBS6, Peter R. de Vries, misdaadverslaggever, 7 May 2010.
324 Korterink, 2010.
325 Mosterd, 2008.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
72

other professionals who consciously or unconsciously come in contact with human trafficking. It is 
hoped that reaching this group will enhance efforts to identify and prevent human trafficking.
Journey tells the story of a victim in a way that allows visitors to see and experience it for themselves. 
The exhibition is made up of seven sea containers with exhibits that tell the story of a victim of 
sexual exploitation. Each container has been designed by a different artist and portrays one specific 
aspect of the victim’s experience. Together they represent the seven stages of the victim’s story.326 
As they walk through the containers, visitors can experience for themselves the problems associa-
ted with human trafficking. Media coverage will expand the reach of the exhibition throughout the 
Netherlands and so enable Journey to provide spin-offs for wider public awareness.

Journey tells the unique story of one victim who was enticed to the UK under false pretences, where she 
was then exploited in prostitution under compulsion. The exhibition is intended to spark a general 
discussion of human trafficking, including the plight of victims who know in advance that they will be 
working in prostitution but who are then still exploited. Journey will also provide spin-off in the form 
of information designed to create wider public awareness of exploitation in sectors other than the sex 
industry.

Recommendations on public awareness
Over the years, the Rapporteur has made a number of recommendations for increasing public awareness. 
In the very first report, the Rapporteur called for a public-awareness campaign on human trafficking. The 
recommendation in the First report was only concerned with exploitation in the sex industry, since other 
forms of exploitation were not yet criminal offences at the time the report was published.327. In the Third 
report, the emphasis in the recommendation concerning information for the general public shifted to-
wards other forms of exploitation. In addition to repeating the recommendation made in the First report 
about starting a publicity campaign on sexual exploitation, the recommendation said: ‘[…] Apart from 
that, the central government has a responsibility to provide information to the public, since the message 
that has to be conveyed is not specific to a particular branch but is that exploitation and abuse of people 
cannot be tolerated. With the pending expansion of the human trafficking article, whereby human 
trafficking will no longer be solely related to the sex industry, this importance is more pronounced. The 
government must accept responsibility and act accordingly.’328 In the Fifth report, this recommendation 
was repeated in more specific terms,329 and finally, the Seventh report contained a recommendation for 
a permanent campaign to increase public awareness of other forms of exploitation.330

The conclusion to be drawn from this is that the Rapporteur’s recommendations for increasing aware-
ness of sexual and other forms of exploitation evolved in anticipation of the expansion of the criminal 
offence of human trafficking to include other forms of exploitation. This development is also reflected 
in the National Action Plan on Human Trafficking and the supplementary measures to it. The original 
NAP only proposed providing information specifically for clients of prostitutes.331 In the supplementary 

326 These stages are hope, journey, uniform, bedroom, customer, stigma, resurrection. 
327 NRM1, recommendation 17.
328 NRM3, recommendation 60.
329 NRM5, recommendation 29
330 NRM7, recommendation 15.
331 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 17.



Recommendations and developments
73

measures to the NAP, this action point was extended to include providing information for actors on the 
demand side of other sectors as well.332

Although other forms of exploitation have been criminalised since 1 January 2005, in her most recent 
report the Rapporteur observed that other forms of exploitation are perceived different  from sexual 
exploitation.333 Other forms of exploitation are still often regarded as a ‘less serious’ form of exploitation 
than sexual exploitation. This difference in perception leads to the conclusion that more needs to be 
done to increase awareness about other forms of exploitation.

Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment: Campaign to publicise exploitation at work334

In mid-2010 the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment launched a campaign to warn possible 
victims of exploitation at work.335 The campaign will run until the end of 2010. Advertisements 
about other forms of exploitation are placed in trade journals for sectors outside the sex industry 
in which there is a heightened risk of exploitation (such as the agriculture and horticulture sector 
or the hospitality industry). The ministry also posts banners on websites that are visited by the 
target groups. At the time of writing, there are also plans to publish articles in newspapers on the 
subject of exploitation. The aim of the campaign is to disseminate information about exploitation 
and suggest actions that people who identify exploitation can take.

CoMensha e-card action336

In the autumn of 2009, CoMensha launched the campaign ‘Denk eens na over uitbuiting!’ Over 
a period of a month CoMensha sent e-cards on other forms of exploitation to all the partners in 
the chain, members of the upper and lower houses of parliament, newspapers and magazines. It 
followed this up by publishing articles on other forms of exploitation in various newspapers and 
magazines. In view of its success, the campaign will be repeated in the autumn of 2010.

In addition to the recommendations for raising general public awareness, a number of recommenda-
tions made a distinction between specific target groups such as clients, operators, neighbours, passers-
by and potential victims. Whereas the recommendations on raising awareness in the First and Third 
reports were directed mainly at actors in the sex industry, the Fifth and Seventh reports also included 
recommendations targeted at individuals outside the sex industry. For example, the Fifth report inclu-
ded the recommendation that individuals who employ people for domestic work should be informed 
about the minimum standards under labour law and about human trafficking with a view to labour 
exploitation. The Seventh report included the recommendation that domestic workers in the service 

332 Supplementary Measures to the National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, Parliamentary Documents II 
2005/06, 28 638, no. 19, pp. 4 and 8-9.

333 NRM7, § 12.2 Identification and perception.
334 Information received verbally and in writing from the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment, April 

and May 2010.
335 The Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment defines exploitation at work as exploitation in the sec-

tors supervised by the ministry´s investigative and inspection services. This definition largely corres-
ponds with BNRM’s own definition of other forms of exploitation. 

336 See CoMensha’s website at www.comensha.nl (consulted on24 August 2010) and information received 
verbally from CoMensha on 14 June 2010.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
74

of diplomats should be informed of their rights.337 At the time of writing, the Ministry of Foreign Af-
fairs is formulating a new policy on the information to be provided to domestic workers employed by 
diplomats.
Another target group specifically addressed in the Fifth report were aliens who are living legally in the 
Netherlands, including asylum seekers, migrants with a residence permit that is dependent on a partner 
and au pairs. Because members of this group may be vulnerable to exploitation, the Rapporteur recom-
mended investigating how the government can inform these people about their legal position and how 
they can be given an opportunity to make enquiries or report work-related abuses.338 A practical follow-
up to this recommendation is ‘Exploitation at the Workplace’, a fact sheet published by the Ministry of 
Social Affairs and Employment at the beginning of 2009.339 Intended for victims and their acquaintances, 
this leaflet contains information about signs of exploitation outside the sex industry and explains the 
rights of victims.340 The fact sheet has been published in 14 languages and distributed to NGOs, social 
services, municipalities and police forces.

Awareness among clients
A special effort has been made to raise awareness among clients of prostitutes. The Rapporteur has made 
a number of recommendations designed to increase awareness among members of this target group. 
The NAP was also mindful of this group.

The Rapporteur’s First report called for the establishment of a reporting centre where people could notify 
their suspicions of human trafficking. The NAP also recommended that specific information should be 
provided to potential or existing clients of prostitutes about how to identify and report human traf-
ficking and its victims.341

On 12 January 2006, the Ministry of Justice launched a publicity campaign called Schijn bedriegt.342 The 
aim of the campaign was to help clients of prostitutes and others directly or indirectly involved in the 
sex industry to recognise signs of coerced prostitution and report suspicious situations to the police 
or – anonymously – to Stichting M.343 (a foundation established to receive anonymous tips). The Schijn 
bedriegt campaign was repeated in 2008.344

In the autumn of 2010, the municipality of Amsterdam will launch its own Schijn bedriegt campaign,345 
targeting clients of prostitutes with catchy banners on erotic websites346 and calling on them to report 
abuses involving forced prostitution, anonymously or otherwise.

337 NRM7, recommendation 16.
338 NRM5, recommendation 32.
339 For more information about the fact sheet, see NRM7, p. 482.
340 Parliamentary Documents II 2009/10, 28 638, no. 47, pp. 7-8.
341 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 17.
342 NRM5, p. 4.
343 Meld Misdaad Anoniem.
344 Opinions differ about the use and results of such an awareness-raising campaign targeted at clients. 

For a brief discussion, see NRM7, pp. 302-303.
345 Information received verbally from Stichting M., 26 May 2010. At the time of writing, the campaign was 

due to start in September 2010. 
346 Similar banners were used in earlier ‘Schijn bedriegt’ campaigns. They were very effective, according 

to Stichting M. (information received verbally from Stichting M., 26 May 2010).



Recommendations and developments
75

An additional feature of the campaign is that a flyer will be published for clients and prostitutes. The 
flyer will contain mainly illustrations in an attempt, by using as little text as possible, to reach a larger 
international target group. Another new element in the Amsterdam campaign is that Stichting M., the 
municipality of Amsterdam, the police and other chain partners will organise a workshop347 for social 
workers, care workers and NGO’s concerned with human trafficking and prostitution.
In the First report, the Rapporteur recommended a ‘channelling discouragement policy’348 aimed at 
discouraging clients from using legally prohibited forms of prostitution in favour of legal forms of pros-
titution that are regulated by licensing conditions. This recommendation was repeated in the Third 
report.349 The Fifth report also referred to the responsibility of clients, expressly noting that clients in 
the regulated sector must remain alert to abuses since they can also occur in that sector.350 This argument 
was further elaborated in the Rapporteur’s response to the draft bill containing ‘Rules on the regulation 
of prostitution and some other forms of sex-related business’ (Act on the regulation of prostitution)351 
in January 2009.352

Article 29 of the current bill makes it a criminal offence for clients to use the services of a non-registered 
prostitute or a prostitute who is working for an unlicensed operator. The maximum punishment for a 
breach of Article 29 is a prison sentence of six months or a third-category fine.

Rapporteur’s response to the draft Act on the regulation of prostitution with respect to criminalisation of clients
‘The Rapporteur agrees that – as the cornerstone of the rules as currently proposed – clients must 
be punishable as provided for in Article 26353. The underlying assumption behind this legislative 
proposal seems to be that victims of human trafficking are only to be found among non-registered 
prostitutes and prostitutes who do not work for a licensed company. However, human trafficking 
also takes place in the legal sector.
Article 19 of the Council of Europe’s Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings sug-
gests that states should consider criminalising clients if they use the services of a prostitute they 
know to be a victim of human trafficking. The proposed Article 26 seems to have a different, mainly 
regulatory effect, since it proposes criminalising clients of non-registered prostitutes or prostitutes 
working for a business that has no permit, even though prostitutes in these situations are not by 
definition victims of human trafficking.

347 The dilemma of the confidential relationship is one of the subjects that will be discussed with members 
of these target groups. How does it affect you to hear about abuses? What can you do with the infor-
mation? Who does what with this information? How are abuses in prostitution dealt with in practice?  
In the workshop, participants will be actively confronted with these issues and dilemmas. The target 
groups will also explore how anonymous tips can be used as an additional weapon against abuse, 
human trafficking and forced prostitution. 

348 NRM1, recommendation 17.
349 NRM3, recommendation 60.
350 NRM5, recommendation 33.
351 This draft proposal has since been translated into a bill entitled ‘Rules on the regulation of prostitution 

and on combating abuses in the sex industry. Parliamentary Documents II 2009/10, 32 211, no. 2.
352 Reaction of the Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings to the draft Act on the Regulation of Pros-

titution, 21 January 2009. For the complete reaction, see NRM7, pp. 683-691.
353 In the definitive version of the bill, Article 26 is renumbered Article 29.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
76

Clients and potential clients should be made aware of their responsibility to buy sexual services 
only in the regulated sector and to remain alert even then.354

Although it does not arise in this legislative proposal, attention needs to be given to the fact that 
a client of a registered sex worker, whom he knows or reasonably could have known was a victim 
of human trafficking, is not currently committing an offence. It should be made a criminal offence 
in the Criminal Code. The criminalisation laid down in Article 26 does not fully reflect the tenor of 
Article 19 of the Convention.’355

By criminalising clients, Article 29 of the bill provides a cornerstone in criminal law for the ‘channelling 
discouragement policy’. In the reaction to the bill, the Rapporteur elaborated on the line adopted in the 
Fifth report that clients in the regulated sector must also be alert to abuses. The Rapporteur referred to 
the possibility of punishing clients under the criminal code if they use the services of a prostitute whom 
they know or reasonably could have known was a victim of human trafficking, even if the prostitute was 
working in the licensed sector.356 The Minister of Justice does not agree with such criminalisation. In 
the memorandum published in response to the report of 15 April 2010, the Minister of Justice (who was 
also acting Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations) responded to this suggestion as follows: ‘I 
am aware that – as the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings also remarked in her recom-
mendation – with the approach I have chosen the client of a registered prostitute, who is nevertheless 
the victim of human trafficking, falls outside the scope of this definition of the offence. Criminalisation 
of a client who uses the services of a prostitute whom he knows to be in a situation of exploitation is in 
itself conceivable, but is extremely problematic from the perspective of enforcement.357

Awareness among professionals outside the anti-human trafficking chain
Besides members of the general public, professionals who are not concerned with human trafficking 
in a professional capacity but who may incidentally be confronted with it, such as youth social workers, 
children’s court judges, teachers, doctors and entrepreneurs, can play an important role in identifying 
human trafficking. Before they can identify human trafficking, however, they have to be made aware of 
it. Like members of the general public, these professionals are not always aware of all the ins and outs 
of human trafficking.
The Rapporteur has made various recommendations concerning these professionals. For example, re-
commendation 34 in the Fifth report refers specifically to providing information about non-sexual forms 
of exploitation to entrepreneurs in risk sectors. A more general recommendation in the Fifth report is 
that every employee of official agencies who could come in contact with human trafficking should re-
ceive instructions on how to recognise signs of exploitation and should be alert to them.358 This recom-
mendation is so broadly formulated that it is difficult to assess the extent to which it has been followed. 

354 NRM5, recommendation 33.
355 Letter form the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings to the Minister of the Interior and 

Kingdom Relations of 21 January 2009 in reaction to the draft Act on the Regulation of Prostitution;.
see also § 2.2.3. For the complete reaction, see NRM7, p. 690 et seq.

356 The reaction of the Minister of Justice to this proposal by the Rapporteur in fact shows that although 
criminalisation is conceivable, its enforcement would be extremely problematic. See Parliamentary Do-
cuments II 2009/10, 32 211, no. 2. 

357 Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 32 211, no. 8.
358 NRM5, recommendation 29.



Recommendations and developments
77

Although various government agencies, such as the police, SIOD, Labour Inspectorate and IND provide 
training on human trafficking, that does not mean that every employee of these agencies who could come 
into contact with victims of human trafficking has followed the training or has received instructions on 
how to tackle human trafficking. For example, some police detectives are certified in the area of human 
trafficking but desk employees and traffic police can also encounter victims of human trafficking.359

Information film for professionals360

At the time of writing, BoschFilm was producing a film on human trafficking for the ministries of 
Justice, Home Affairs and Kingdom Relations and Social Affairs and Employment.361 The film is 
exclusively intended for professionals and concentrates on three subjects: loverboys, the original 
trafficking in women and other forms of exploitation. The film’s target group includes not only pro-
fessionals who are involved with human trafficking through their jobs, but also professionals who 
may incidentally encounter human trafficking, such as people working with the Child Protection 
Council, the chambers of commerce and the youth protection services.

2.8	 Prosecution	and	trial

2.8.1 Human trafficking as a priority for the public prosecution service
Combating human trafficking has been a priority for the public prosecution service for a number of years 
now. In the Third report, the Rapporteur said that tighter national coordination was needed because the 
differences in how human trafficking was addressed in different districts showed that they did not all 
devote the same attention to human trafficking. The Rapporteur added that since the public prosecution 
service leads investigations, it should indicate more clearly what is necessary and what efforts need to be 
made to adequately enforce the criminal ban on human trafficking.362 Similar recommendations were 
made in the Fifth report, which also called for specific measures to be formulated and implemented 
in practice to reflect that human trafficking is a policy priority for the public prosecution service.363 
Meanwhile, all 11 regional offices have a dedicated regional prosecutor for human trafficking and mi-
grant smuggling, and the public prosecution service has established the Programme to Strengthen the 
Approach to Combating Human Trafficking and Migrant Smuggling364 to embed the subject at various 
levels of the organisation.NRM7 Human trafficking has, in any case, become an area of specialisation at 
the regional level in the public prosecution service.

359 ROOD Utrecht made the following recommendation on this: ‘Besides detectives investigating human 
trafficking, police officers who are the first to come into contact with victims of human trafficking 
(such as front-office staff ) should be trained in communication with victims and should be aware of 
the internal procedures for intake and reporting human trafficking.’ ROOD Utrecht, In gesprek met 
slachtoffers van loverboys, een onderzoek naar ervaringen met politie en justitie van het proces van 
aangifte tot de veroordeling, June 2009, p. 34.

360 Source: interview with BoschFilm, 9 April 2010.
361 The film will be shown to professionals and semi-professionals on 11 October 2010.
362 NRM3, recommendations 48 and 49.
363 NRM5, recommendations 50 and 53.
364 Public Prosecution Service, Memorandum on Strengthening the approach to combating human traf-

ficking and migrant smuggling, 2008. For further discussion of this subject, see NRM7, pp. 371 et seq.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
78

Points raised in the Seventh report included the need to safeguard continuity (especially where there is 
a rapid turnover of specialist prosecutors) and ensure the availability of sufficient capacity in the public 
prosecution service. In practice, there sometimes seems to be too little time and, in addition to regional 
prosecutors, it is important to have sufficient expertise and resources at local level.NRM7

The Rapporteur has been conscious from the outset that although the police and public prosecution 
service in many cities and regions give priority to investigating and prosecuting human trafficking, they 
must also be given the resources to intensify efforts to combat it. The First report contained the recom-
mendation that the degree and intensity of the effort made should not be left purely to the interplay 
between the local or regional authorities (the local authority, the police and the public prosecution 
service) but should be directed centrally and addressed from a national perspective, with the necessary 
capacity in terms of manpower and equipment being made available.365 Without additional capacity, 
efforts to combat human trafficking would not receive the attention and resources they required among 
the many other priorities, according to the Third report.366 The Rapporteur also pointed out that some 
of the policy proposals of the public prosecution service would probably lead to more investigations and 
prosecutions of human trafficking, which should be taken into account in planning the capacity of the 
investigative agencies, the public prosecution service and the judiciary.367

The figures show that the number of cases registered by the public prosecution service fluctuated greatly 
between 2000 and 2009. After sharp increases in the intervening period, the number of registered cases 
in 2009 had returned to the level of 2000. The number of cases dealt with by the courts – in first instance 
– almost doubled in the period 2000-2008.368

One of the recommendations made by D.W. Steenhuis in response to the court’s ruling that the prose-
cution was inadmissible in the Sierra human trafficking case in November 2009369 was that the public 
prosecution service must ensure that there is sufficient capacity available throughout the entire course 
of an investigation. Some other recommendations made following this case partially substantiate bot-
tlenecks identified earlier by the Rapporteur in relation to capacity - both quantitative and qualitative.
It is worrying that the public prosecution service observed in its annual report for 2009 that the investiga-
tive services and the public prosecution service are unable to deal with all offences and their perpetrators 
with the available staff and resources.370

365 NRM1, recommendation 9.
366 NRM3, recommendation 36.
367 NRM5, recommendation 52.
368 From 139 in 2000 to 281 in 2007, and in 2009 there were 136 cases registered by the district offices, see 

§ 3.4.1, Figure 3.20.
369 Alkmaar District Court, 16 November 2009, LJN: BK3472 and BK3440. Following the dismissal of the case 

against five defendants in the Sierra human trafficking case, the chief public prosecutors in Haarlem 
and Alkmaar decided to conduct an evaluation of how the case was handled in order to learn from the 
experience. The recommendations of D.W. Steenhuis relate only to this case (Alles is niets. Rapportage naar 
aanleiding of de niet-ontvankelijkheid in de mensenhandelzaak Sierra, Appendix to Parliamentary Documents 29 279, 
no. 110). The Minister of Justice has said that measures have been taken at the local level to address the 
problems that were identified (Letter of 20 May 2010, Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 29 279, no. 110, p. 2). 

370 Public Prosecution Service Annual Report 2009, available at www.jaarberichtom.nl. OM: behoud veilig-
heidsniveau niet realistisch, De Volkskrant 27 May 2010. On this point, see § 2.6.3.



Recommendations and developments
79

2.8.2 Policy priorities in the public prosecution service
The Instructions on Human Trafficking lay down the procedures for investigating and prosecuting hu-
man trafficking. Indications of human trafficking must be followed up, and any relevant leads must be 
investigated and, if possible, lead to a prosecution. If a case involves transnational human trafficking, 
the public prosecution service must actively seek international cooperation. Investigations into human 
trafficking should also include financial investigations and enquiries into the possibility of confiscating 
illegally earned profits.NRM7 371

Financial investigations and confiscation of illegal earnings
With reference to profits as a driving force for human trafficking, in the First report was recommended 
devoting regular and specific attention to the possibility of confiscating illegally earned profits in the 
Netherlands and abroad during the investigation and prosecution of a suspect. ‘That could be the most 
effective way of repressing the phenomenon’, the Rapporteur felt.372 The Rapporteur noted that it was 
already the policy of the public prosecution service to investigate money flows with a view to confis-
cating illegal earnings, by instituting a criminal financial investigation, if necessary,373 but applying 
the measure in practice was sometimes thwarted because of problems in gathering evidence in the 
principal case. The Rapporteur also referred to the fact that, while discovering the financial benefit to 
the perpetrator can be important for furnishing evidence, it can be particularly helpful in underpinning 
claims for compensation by the victim. On this point, the Rapporteur mentioned in the Seventh report 
how important it is for the judge who decides on a victim’s claim as an injured party to have the report 
of the financial investigation. The public prosecutor should either present the claim for confiscation 
of illegally earned profits at the same time as the main case or submit the financial report during the 
hearing of the main case.374

In the Third report, the Rapporteur again referred to the need for a greater effort to achieve results 
in relation to the confiscation of illegally earned profits. The large profits and low risk of being 
caught remain an important driving force for (potential) human traffickers. The Rapporteur noted 
that it is important to commence financial investigations more frequently and earlier in an investiga-
tion. The investigations should make use of the expertise of the Criminal Assets Confiscation Bureau 
(BOOM) and operations should be carried out in cooperation with the Financial Intelligence Unit-
Netherlands, formerly the Office for the Disclosure of Unusual Transactions (MOT). International 
cooperation is also urgently needed in this area if the measures taken are to have an impact, since 
profits made in one country are often invested in another.375 Where possible, money flows should 
be followed to those other countries. The study carried out by BNRM for the Fifth report showed that 
close cooperation with other countries is possible in this type of investigation and can yield useful 
information.376

371 Instructions on Human Trafficking of the Public Prosecution Service, Government Gazette 2008, 253.
372 NRM1, recommendation 5.
373 On this point, see also § 2.6.2.
374 NRM7, p. 497 et seq. and recommendation 38.
375 NRM3, recommendation 51. Financial investigations can also be useful in identifying large internatio-

nal human trafficking organisations, ‘facilitators’ and contacts in the legitimate business world (NRM5, 
recommendation 47).

376 NRM5, recommendation 49.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
80

International cooperation
In the Third report, the Rapporteur said that the public prosecution service should explain and demon-
strate more clearly where practical obstacles to international cooperation still occur, despite existing 
legal instruments. A national standard is usually applied in determining the effectiveness of an investi-
gation and the Rapporteur noted that, as a result, too little was known about the phases of the human 
trafficking process that take place or have taken place outside the Netherlands. This in turn means that 
the human trafficking chain is often not entirely broken and the criminal activities can therefore be 
easily resumed. The Rapporteur concluded that, on balance, this outcome can be regarded as unsatis-
factory and not effective enough.377

The Rapporteur called on the government to promote closer international cooperation and to remove 
obstacles that cause a situation where only some of the actors in the human trafficking chain are arrested 
while others (in the Netherlands and elsewhere) are able to avoid trial. This is not only essential from the 
perspective of upholding standards, but also because effective repression contributes to prevention.378 
Also relevant in this context is the Rapporteur’s recommendation that information should be supplied 
to Europol, in accordance with existing agreements, with a view to increasing cooperation between in-
ternational police forces, both in an operational sense and in terms of sharing information.379 This will 
yield a clearer insight into the methods employed by human traffickers and what needs to be done to 
combat them. Eurojust can also play a role in this. One of the action points in the National Action Plan 
on Human Trafficking is that constant attention will be devoted to the Netherlands’ position in relation 
to other countries in the context of international human trafficking.380

The investigation codenamed Koolvis is a good example of cooperation between the Netherlands 
(as a country of destination and transit), NAPTIP (the anti-human trafficking organisation in Nigeria 
where, according to the public prosecution service, the victims came from) and other countries 
(such as Spain and Italy) where the human trafficking organisation operated. The ultimate aim 
was to identify every member of the criminal organisation.381 In December 2009, a number of 
suspects were acquitted of human trafficking, but the public prosecution service has appealed 
against those decisions.382

2.8.3 Victims in the criminal process

Treatment of victims
There is a growing realisation that a victim, particularly in human trafficking cases, is no just a wit-
ness in a criminal trial. For example, the draft EU directive on human trafficking contains provisions 
designed to protect victims during criminal proceedings, including measures to prevent secondary 

377 NRM3, recommendation 50.
378 NRM3, recommendation 40.
379 NRM7, recommendation 31.
380 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 48.
381 NRM7, pp. 364 et seq. 
382 The District Court in Zwolle ruled in this case on 3 December 2009, LJN: BK5398, BK5669, BK5695, 

BK5660, BK5349, BK5377. Suspects were convicted of migrant smuggling and of membership of a cri-
minal organisation.   



Recommendations and developments
81

victimisation. One of the possibilities mentioned is the use of communication technology,383 a video 
link for example, to allow a victim to be interviewed without visual contact with the suspect. More 
generally, the Rapporteur recommended that the government should indicate whether the EU Frame-
work Decision on the Standing of Victims in Criminal Proceedings had led to amendments in Dutch 
legislation and, if so, what they were.384 This recommendation was concerned, among other things, 
with victims being provided at an early stage with information that is important for protecting their 
interests.
In accordance with the public prosecution service’s Instructions on Human Trafficking, victims in the 
Netherlands must be informed of the possibility of requesting information about the progress of the 
criminal case concerning them.385 Victims must then be informed of any important decisions made 
during the investigation. Particularly if a suspect is being held in pre-trial detention, it is important to 
inform the victim as soon as possible if the suspect is released.386

Suspending or lifting pre-trial detention and granting prisoners leave can generate a great deal of con-
sternation in society, particularly if victims were not informed that the suspect was being released, or has 
even fled abroad. Situations like this prompted the current Minister of Justice to say that the next gover-
nment should produce a plan for giving victims the opportunity to express their views about whether a 
convicted person should be granted leave.387

Victims may be a factor in other judicial decisions. The district court in Leeuwarden, for example, 
refused to grant conditional parole to a convicted human trafficker in June 2010.388 This person 
was sentenced in 2009 to four years in prison for human trafficking involving four victims. Later 
that year, he failed to return from a weekend leave and was ultimately arrested in Germany. In this 
case, the public prosecutor had argued that on the very first day of his leave the convicted person 
had visited the prostitution zone (where the offences for which he was convicted had taken place) 
looking for one of the victims. He was also in a prostitution zone when he was arrested in Germany, 
where he was accompanied by his girlfriend, who was also a victim in the case. Although the court 
was cursory in its statement of the grounds for its decision not to grant a conditional release, it did 
refer to the events that had occurred during the period he was free.

Non-punishment principle
Victims of human trafficking are sometimes also perpetrators of criminal offences that are connected 
with the human trafficking situation. The Rapporteur conducted research389 into this problem and the 
application of the non-punishment principle and made a number of recommendations on the basis of 
that study. An important recommendation was that a person’s status as a victim of human trafficking 

383 Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on preventing and combating trafficking in human 
beings, and protecting victims, repealing Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA, 29 March 2010, COM(2010)95 final, 
2010/0065 (COD), Article 11. On this point, see also § 2.2.

384 NRM3, recommendation 5. The Act to strengthen the standing of victims in the criminal process arose 
in part from this Framework Decision (OJ 2001, L82/1), Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 2010, 1. 

385 See also NRM5, recommendation 54.
386 Instructions on Human Trafficking of the Public Prosecution Service, Government Gazette. 2008, 235. 
387 Slachtoffer horen over verlof veroordeelde, De Telegraaf, 22 May 2010.
388 Leeuwarden District Court, 2 June 2010 (not published).
389 NRM7, Chapter 6.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
82

should be regarded as grounds for declining to prosecute that person.390 The Rapporteur also recom-
mended inserting a provision in the Instructions on Human Trafficking that when a victim commits a 
criminal offence, the fact that the suspect is a victim should be noted in the official report.391 At the time 
of writing, these recommendations had not yet been implemented.
However, in a number of judgments is, for the first time, specifically referred to this problem and to the 
application of the non-punishment principle. One of those cases is described below.392

Application of the non-punishment principle
In a recent case before the district court in The Hague393, the public prosecutor explicitly referred 
to the non-punishment principle and decided, in accordance with that principle, not to prosecute 
the victim concerned, who was also a suspect. In this case, a victim of human trafficking was herself 
suspected of involvement in human trafficking with respect to other victims. The public prosecutor 
explained her reasons for not prosecuting victim A as follows: ‘The public prosecutor told the court 
that A was arrested on 14 October 2008. It quickly emerged from her statements, but also from 
the statements of the other women, that A was herself also a victim. The public prosecutor based 
her decision not to prosecute A on the non-punishment principle and on the following facts and 
circumstances:
– A also worked as a prostitute herself and handed her money over to the suspect.
– She watched over the other women, but did not coerce them.
– The other women regarded her as a victim, not as a suspect.
– She was under the influence of the suspect because he had promised her a future with him and 

she still loved him.
– She controlled the other women to avoid being abused or threatened by the suspect. She was 

afraid of the suspect.
The non-punishment principle – laid down in Article 26 of the Council of Europe’s Convention on 
Action against Human Trafficking – says that states must provide for the possibility of not punishing 
victims of human trafficking for their involvement in unlawful activities, to the extent that they 
have been compelled to do so.’

Compensation and confiscation
In the First report, the Rapporteur said that greater efforts should be made under existing legislation (cri-
minal and civil) to secure compensation for victims of human trafficking. In this context, a connection 
was made with financial investigations, because, as mentioned above, discovering the financial benefits 
enjoyed by the perpetrator can be important not only in furnishing evidence but also for underpinning 
claims for compensation by the victim. The link between compensation and confiscation of illegally 
earned profits was explicitly made in a recommendation in the Seventh report. This recommendation 
states that it should be made possible by law – in addition to the existing possibilities – for a decision 
on a claim by an injured party that is submitted in accordance with Article 51b of the Dutch Code of Cri-
minal Procedure to be deferred and made at the same time as the decision on the demand for an order 

390 NRM7, recommendation 36.
391 NRM7, recommendation 37.
392 See also The Hague Court of Appeal, 19 January 2010 (Mehak), LJN: BK9406, BK9410, BK9356.
393 The Hague District Court, 18 December 2009, LJN: BK8237.



Recommendations and developments
83

to confiscate illegal earnings rather than at the time of the judgment in the criminal case.394 At the time 
of writing, this recommendation had not yet been implemented.
It is still very difficult for victims of human trafficking to secure compensation for material damage 
and emotional injury, including loss of income.395 The arrangements for payment of an advance on a 
compensation award by the Violent Offences Compensation Fund could help to partially rectify this.396

2.8.4 Case-law on human trafficking in the sex industry
For the Seventh report, the Rapporteur commissioned a study of the criminal case-law concerning hu-
man trafficking in the sex industry. In response to this study, the Rapporteur observed that Article 273f 
of the Dutch Criminal Code is not a straightforward provision. One of the points to emerge from the 
study was that judges differ in their interpretation of various legal issues and that there is no uniformity 
in how the context of violence, coercion, deception and the possibility for victims to escape from their 
situation is assessed.
The number of acquittals in human trafficking cases is high, for example in comparison with the num-
ber in rape cases. The statistics also show that the number of convictions has declined over the years. In 
2008, there were convictions in 51% of cases.397 Contrary to expectations, the BNRM study (into human 
trafficking cases dealt with in first instance in 2007) indicated that this was only partly due to the absence 
of reliable statements by victims and witnesses.
The Rapporteur has recommended that guidelines398 should be formulated to provide guidance for 
judges in determining sentences in individual cases and so create consistency of sentencing in human 
trafficking cases. The National Consultative Body for Presidents of Criminal Sectors of Courts (LOVS) is 
currently investigating the possibility of developing guidelines to promote uniformity of sentencing in 
human trafficking cases.399 It has been suggested to the LOVS that it should form a working group to 
formulate internal principles for sentencing.400 The public prosecution service has also commenced 
preparations to draw up guidelines for the sentences to be demanded in human trafficking cases. The 
aim is to have these guidelines in place by the end of 2010.401

Another finding from the BNRM study of case-law that led to a recommendation related to a num-
ber of cases in which attempted human trafficking was declared proven, when in fact the full offence 

394 NRM7, recommendation 3.
395 For a survey of the possibilities for victims of human trafficking to secure compensation , see NRM5, 

p. 58 et seq.
396 The act providing for this system of advance payments, among other things, the Act of 17 December 

2009 to amend the Code of Criminal Procedure, the Criminal Code and the Violent Offences Com-
pensation Fund Act to improve the standing of the victim in the criminal process, was published on 1 
January 2010, Bulletin of Acts, Orders and Decrees 2010, 1.The law enters into force on 1 January 2011, Bulletin 
of Acts, Orders and Decrees 210, 291. See also § 3.3.3.

397 See § 3.4.2, Figure 3.29.
398 NRM7, recommendation 40.
399 Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 28 638, no. 47, p. 12. 
400 Memorandum on human trafficking by the public prosecution service, submitted for information 

purposes to the meeting of the Task Force in May 2010.
401 Parliamentary Documents 2009/10, 28 638, no. 47 p.12. A first guideline, the guideline on criminal pro-

cedure for human trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation was published on 25 August 2010, 
Government Gazette 2010, no 13154.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
84

had usually been committed. Attempted human trafficking is scarcely ever prosecuted. Nevertheless, 
Supreme Court jurisprudence on attempted human trafficking provides adequate grounds for doing 
so.402 The Rapporteur advised the public prosecution service to address this issue, since the successful 
prosecution of attempted human trafficking could have a preventive effect.403

In a case before the police magistrate in Rotterdam in January 2010, an underage suspect was char-
ged with attempted human trafficking, among other things. The victim was a girl of 13. According 
to the public prosecutor, the suspect had asked her to work for him in prostitution and earn money 
for him with sex. He had offered her – via MSN – to men (clients) for the performance of sexual acts. 
He had maintained contact with men and arranged clients for her, and he had offered to bring her 
to rendezous points and to transport her to perform sexual acts. The judge found that attempted 
human trafficking had been proven, if only because the suspect had asked the victim to work for 
him and had offered her services via MSN404 (Article 273f (1) (5) in conjunction with Article 45 of the 
Dutch Criminal Code) and imposed a sentence of 120 hours of community service. In this case, the 
planned crime (human trafficking) had not actually been carried out.405

BNRM plans to publish the findings of a follow-up study of the case-law in 2011. One of the subjects to 
be covered in that study is the period of pre-trial detention.

2.8.5  Prosecution and trial of human trafficking outside the sex industry  
‘(‘other forms of exploitation’)

A comprehensive picture of the various stages is needed
With human trafficking in sectors other than the sex industry, there is often a combination of indicati-
ons of exploitation. These individual indications may, for example, involve violations of the Economic 
Offences Act, Foreign Nationals (Employment) Act and the Minimum Wage and Minimum Holiday Al-
lowance Act. It only becomes clear that there might be a situation of exploitation when these indications 
are seen as a whole.NRM7 In the Seventh report, therefore, the Rapporteur recommended an integrated 
approach to cases involving other forms of exploitation.406 In that context, it is important that the hu-
man trafficking and any related criminal offences are dealt with simultaneously by the same forum so 
that the judge has a complete picture of the human trafficking. This recommendation is connected with 
recommendation 55 in the Fifth report, when the Rapporteur called for the inclusion of official reports 
about the conditions and background information about the nature and seriousness of the offences in 
the criminal file. In the case of other forms of exploitation it might, for example, be relevant to film or 
take photos of the workplace and to measure the temperature for extreme heat or cold. These methods 
were used in the case of the ‘Indonesian kitchen workers’.407

402 Supreme Court, 2 October 2001, LJN: AB2806.
403 NRM7, recommendation 33.
404 Information from the public prosecution service to BNRM, 23 February 2010.
405 Rotterdam District Court, record of the verbal judgment of the police magistrate, 28 January 2010 (not 

published). See also NRM7, pp. 438 et seq.
406 NRM7, recommendation 35.
407 NRM7, pp. 483-484. There were convictions in this case, see The Hague District Court, 3 May 2010, LJN: 

BM3374.



Recommendations and developments
85

Judgments
A number of judgments on exploitation outside the sex industry – some by the courts of appeal and the 
Supreme Court – have appeared since the publication of the Seventh report. A very important judgement 
was the Supreme Court’s ruling in the ‘Chinese restaurant’ case.

Chinese restaurant, Supreme Court, 27 October 2009, LJN: BI7099408

This case concerned a suspicion of exploitation of Chinese workers living illegally in the Nether-
lands.409 They were working under poor conditions in a restaurant. Large numbers of them slept 
together in the same room, they worked long hours and had no days off.
The question to be decided concerned the definition of the elements of the charges ‘abuse of au-
thority arising from the actual state of affairs’, ‘abuse of a vulnerable position’ and ‘exploitation’. 
The court of appeal in Den Bosch410 upheld the judgment of the district court in Den Bosch411 that a 
presumption of ‘abuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs’ and ‘abuse of a vulnerable 
position’ requires a certain initiative and positive action on the part of the perpetrator, whereby the 
weaker or vulnerable position of the victims is consciously abused. The appeal court found that the 
suspects had not taken any initiative or action with respect to the Chinese. The Chinese approached 
the restaurant themselves and had themselves come to the Netherlands to work. Under those cir-
cumstances, the appeal court found, it could not be proved that the suspects had consciously abused 
the vulnerable position of the Chinese by taking them in and housing them. The appeal court also 
found that there was no question of exploitation, deciding that although the situation was socially 
undesirable it had not been shown that the working conditions were in themselves bad. Furthermore, 
the Chinese received the money they earned and, according to the appeal court, it could not be said 
of the Chinese that they did not have any reasonable choice but to work or to reside in the restaurant.

The public prosecution service appealed to the Supreme Court. One of its grounds for appeal was 
that the appeal court had wrongly interpreted Article 273a of the old Dutch Criminal Code, in par-
ticular the elements ‘abuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs’ and ‘abuse of a 
vulnerable position’ contained in the charges. The appeal also complained that the appeal court 
had failed to give adequate reasons for its finding that there was no ‘exploitation’.
The Supreme Court412 ruled that to prove ‘abuse’, it is sufficient to show conditional intent on 
the part of the suspect with respect to those circumstances. The same applies for cases where 
the victim is in a vulnerable position. There is no need, as the appeal court found, for conscious 
abuse. The appeal court’s requirement of initiative on the part of the suspect is therefore not an 
independent requirement.
With respect to the term ‘exploitation’, the Supreme Court found that it is impossible to give a 
general definition of when there is exploitation, but that it depends heavily on the circumstances 

408 See also J.Silvis, Vooropgestelde arresten. Ontwikkelingen in de strafrechtelijke jurisprudentie 2009, The Hague 2010, 
pp. 241-254.

409 For an analysis of this case in first instance and on appeal, see also NRM7, pp. 505-507.
410 Den Bosch Court of Appeal, 30 January 2008, LJN: BC3000 and LJN: BC2999.
411 Den Bosch District Court, 8 March 2007, LJN: BA0145 and LJN: BA0141. The judgment against a third 

suspect in this case followed several months later (Den Bosch District Court, 28 July 2007, LJN: BD8599) 
and also ended in acquittal for human trafficking. 

412 Supreme Court, 27 October 2009, LJN: BI7099.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
86

of the case. In a case like the present one, relevant factors in the assessment include the nature and 
duration of the work, the restrictions they impose on the individuals concerned and the economic 
benefit to the employer. The generally accepted standards in Dutch society should be adopted as 
the frame of reference for weighing those factors. The Supreme Court also found that to meet the 
definition of the offence it is not necessary for the victim to be actually exploited. The Supreme 
Court reached the conclusion that the appeal court’s decision that there was no situation of ex-
ploitation was incomprehensible, without further reasoning, given that court’s finding that some 
victims worked 11 to 13 hours a day just for room and board and others for a monthly income of 
€450 and €800, that they had no more than five days off a month and that they had to share their 
bedroom with others.
The case was referred back to the appeal court in Den Bosch.413

Since the Supreme Court’s judgment, five more new cases concerning other forms of exploitation have 
been dealt with by different courts, four414 of which led to convictions for human trafficking in the 
sense of other forms of exploitation. Appeals in two other cases also led to convictions.415 The number 
of convictions for other forms of exploitation has risen since the Supreme Court’s judgment in the Chi-
nese restaurant case. Up to June 2010, a total of 18 different cases – almost every one of which involved 
a number of suspects – had come before the courts, and nine of them had led to convictions. Not all of 
the judgments are final, however. Before 27 October 2009 – the date of the Supreme Court’s judgment 
–12 cases had been dealt with, of which four had resulted to convictions. Compared with the period of 
almost five years prior to that judgment, both the number of cases dealt with and the number of con-
victions for other forms of exploitation have risen steeply.

413 The appeal court in Den Bosch had not yet re-heard the case at the time of writing. A third suspect was 
convicted of human trafficking by the court of appeal in Den Bosch: Den Bosch Court of Appeal, 19 Fe-
bruary 2010, LJN: BL5492. The case against this suspect had previously only been heard in first instance. 

414 These were: The Hague District Court 18 March 2010: LJN: BL8022; Dordrecht District Court 20 April 
2010, LJN: BM1743; The Hague District Court 3 May 2010, LJN: BM 33743; and The Hague District Court 
12 May 2010, LJN: BM4240. The only case that ended in an acquittal was The Hague District Court 17 
February 2010, LJN: BL4928.

415 The Hague Court of Appeal, 19 January 2010, LJN: BK9406 and LJN: BK9372 and Den Bosch Court of 
Appeal, 19 February 2010, LJN: BL5492.



3	 	Data	collection	and	statistical	trends	
2000	–	2009

3.1	 Introduction
This chapter is devoted to the quantitative data that has been collected in the last decade in relation to 
human trafficking. In § 3.2 there is a discussion of developments in international harmonised data col-
lection and the interpretation of quantitative data collected at national level.
The statistical trends at national level in the last decade are presented in § 3.3 and § 3.4, with the focus 
on victims in § 3.3 and on suspects and offenders in § 3.4.

3.2	 Data	collection
Attention for the subject of human trafficking has grown enormously in the last ten years, not only in the 
Netherlands but also internationally, creating a need for more knowledge (including quantitative data) 
about the phenomenon in order to increase the effectiveness of efforts to prevent and combat human 
trafficking and to provide better protection for victims.

3.2.1 International harmonised data collection
Insight into the nature and scale of human trafficking at international level can help to improve efforts 
to prevent and combat it.1 Accordingly, numerous international documents have stressed the impor-
tance of international harmonisation of data collection on the topic of human trafficking, starting with 
the The Hague Declaration of 19972 and, most recently, the Action Plan Implementing the Stockholm 
Programme in April 20103 (see § 2.3.5)4. Consequently, various initiatives have been taken in this area, 
including:
– Development of Guidelines for the Collection of Data on Trafficking in Human Beings, including Comparable Indicators5;

1 The Rapporteur made a recommendation on the subject in NRM3, recommendation 30.
2 The Hague Ministerial Declaration on European Guidelines for Effective Measures to Prevent and Combat Trafficking in 

Women for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation. 
3 Action Plan Implementing the Stockholm Programme, 20 April 2010, COM(2010)171 def. 
4 See also, for example, the Council conclusions on establishing an informal EU Network of National Rapporteurs or 

Equivalent Mechanisms on Trafficking in Human Beings, 2946th Justice and Home Affairs Council meeting, 
Luxembourg, 4 June 2009.

5 Guidelines for the Collection of Data on Trafficking in Human Beings, Including Comparable Indicators (IOM) (Arono-
witz, A., 2009). For a brief description, see NRM7 § 3.2.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
88

– Programme for the Enhancement of Anti-trafficking Responses in South-Eastern Europe – Data Collection and Infor-
mation Management (DCIM I)6; succeeded by

– Trafficking in Human Beings: Data Collection and Harmonised Information Management Systems (DCIM-EU)7;
– European Delphi Survey – A Practical Exercise in Developing Indicators of Trafficking in Human Beings8; and
– The MONTRASEC project9.
BNRM is or has been a partner in a number of these projects.10

The MONTRASEC project11 (Monitoring Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Exploitation of Children) deser-
ves a special mention here. The intention of the MONTRASEC system is to produce internationally 
comparable, integrated and up to date data with the help of advanced software. The system can 
automatically upload data from existing registration systems, so that no additional work is required 
to enter the data.
The European Commission financed or co-financed almost all of the initiatives12 mentioned here (see 
§ 2.3.4), with a view to developing the maximum possible expertise in the field of international data 
collection on human trafficking.13 However, there is a risk that the multiplicity of initiatives will lead to 
different standards being implemented in different countries, which could present an obstacle to achie-
ving the international harmonisation of data.14 It is also important for new initiatives to build on the 
results of projects that have already been completed. The network of national rapporteurs or equivalent 
mechanisms could play a role in steering these developments (see § 1.1.3).
Another point that needs to be made in connection with the initiatives in the field of data collection is 
that it is not yet possible in the Netherlands to collect data on all of the proposed indicators. Experience 
has shown that, unfortunately, the quality of the data can suffer if too much data on human trafficking 
have to be collected. According to the ‘less is more’ principle, it might therefore be preferable to com-
mence efforts to harmonise international data collection with only the most basic indicators. If the 
initial results are evaluated positively, the harmonised international data collection could then perhaps 
be expanded with other indicators in order to achieve the ultimate objective of the data collection, which 
is to prevent and combat human trafficking. It is important to realise in this context that data collection 
is not a goal in itself.

6 Handbook on Anti-Trafficking Data Collection in South-Eastern Europe: Developing Regional Criteria (ICMPD) (Surtees, 
R., 2008). For a brief description, see NRM7 § 3.2. At the time of writing, phase two of this project (DCIM 
II), which involved writing a manual for the data analysis, was being completed.

7 Anti-Trafficking Data Collection and Information Management in the European Union - a Handbook, the situation in the 
Czech Republic, Poland, Portugal and the Slovak Republic (ICMPD) (Surtees, R., 2009).

8 European Delphi survey on indicators of trafficking in human beings jointly implemented by the European Commission and 
the ILO (ILO, 2008) and Operational indicators of trafficking in human beings, results from a Delphi survey implemented 
by the ILO and the European Commission (ILO, 2009). For a brief description, see NRM7 § 3.2.

9 This project, a follow-up to the SIAMSECT project, yielded the following publication: The MONTRASEC 
demo. A bench-mark for member state and EU automated data collection and reporting on trafficking in human beings 
and sexual exploitation of children (IRCP) (Vermeulen, G. & Paterson, N., 2010).

10 In DCIM I, DCIM II, DCIM EU and European Delphi survey.
11 MONTRASEC is a consortium of IRCP (Institute for International Research on Criminal Policy, Belgium) and Trans-

crime (Joint Research Centre on Transnational Crime, Italy) and is co-financed by the European Commission. 
12 Except DCIM I and II.
13 Expert meeting MONTRASEC, Brussels, 1 October 2009.
14 NRM7 § 3.2.



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
89

3.2.2 Interpretation of quantitative data
Since human trafficking is often hidden and victims are often unwilling or afraid to speak out15 (or do not 
realise that they are victims16), there are probably a large number of unknown cases of human trafficking 
(a large ‘dark number’). Consequently, statistical trends based on the number of known cases of human traf-
ficking usually do not directly reflect developments in the total number of cases of human trafficking17. 
The number of known situations of human trafficking depends to a large extent on factors such as the pu-
blic attention for human trafficking, the priorities of the investigative services and the public prosecution 
service, the method of registration employed by victim support organisations, and changes in the law.
At the same time, the (coincidental) discovery of a single, but major, human trafficking case18 has a 
substantial impact on the annual figures, since the total number of known cases of human trafficking 
each year is relatively small. The notification to CoMensha of 50 victims discovered in the same human 
trafficking situation (see § 3.3.1), for example, is clearly reflected in the annual figures for victims (as 
regards the total number of reported victims, the background characteristics of victims such as gender, 
age and nationality, and the sector in which victims were exploited).
It is therefore important when analysing the data to be aware of the specific context in which the data 
were collected and of the various factors that might influence the data. In the following sections and 
subsections the cautionary notes applicable to the data presented are discussed at length and, where 
possible, statistical trends are explained in relation to the developments that were previously described 
in Chapter 2.

3.3	 Victims
This section contains data on registered victims of human trafficking in the Netherlands (in other words, 
victims known to the relevant agencies in the Netherlands).19 The findings are based on:
– information from the Human Trafficking Coordination Centre (CoMensha) in § 3.3.1 (background 

details of victims reported to CoMensha);

15 For reasons of fear, shame or guilt. Non-Dutch victims could also face a language barrier and/or not 
know who they can report to in the Netherlands. Furthermore, victims living illegally in the Nether-
lands sometimes fear the police because they are afraid of being deported. Sometimes victims are also 
‘in debt’ to the human trafficker, a debt that they believe they have to pay off. Or non-Dutch victims 
feel an obligation to send money back regularly to their family (NRM1 § 4.5, NRM3 § 3.6). 

16 For example, victims of ‘traditional’ loverboys who are in love with their loverboy (NRM3 § 3.2.2) or 
non-Dutch victims who prefer being exploited in the Netherlands to the situation in their own country 
(NRM5 § 3.2.1). 

17 In other words, including the large number of cases of human trafficking that are probably not know 
about. 

18 In other words, cases involving a relatively large number of victims and/or offenders. The victims and/
or offenders in the same case often share the same characteristics (such as gender, age group, natio-
nality and the sector in which the exploitation occurred). In this type of major case the exploitation 
often occurs outside the sex industry. With the growing attention to other forms of exploitation (both 
in terms of investigation and prosecution and in society), (major) cases of other forms of exploitation 
will probably come to light increasingly often in the future.

19 Because of the anticipated large ‘dark number’, there will be a large number of unknown victims of 
human trafficking (see § 3.2.2). 



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
90

– information from the Immigration and Naturalisation Service (IND) in § 3.3.2 (background details of 
victims who were granted a B9 residence permit); and

– information from the Central Fines Collection Agency (CJIB) in § 3.3.3 (about orders to pay compen-
sation to victims).

3.3.1 Victims in the CoMensha register
CoMensha20 is the central agency for notification of all victims of human trafficking in the Netherlands. 
CoMensha must therefore be notified of every potential victim identified in the Netherlands by the indivi-
dual or agency that has become aware of the victim (or by the victim personally). Victims can be reported 
solely for the purpose of registration, for registration and information, or for registration and shelter.21

Research method
The information in this subsection (3.3.1) for the period since 2006 is largely based on databases provi-
ded to BNRM by CoMensha. Information about individual victims can be derived from these databases 
(‘secondary analysis’). Some of the data are taken from CoMensha’s annual reports.22 For the period prior 
to 2006, BNRM based its findings solely on those annual reports.
For the explanatory notes to the figures and tables in this section, the additional tables in Appendix 3 
and the applicable statistics, see Appendix 2.

Remarks about the figures
CoMensha’s records are intended to cover all known victims of human trafficking in the Netherlands. 
However, in reality the number of victims registered with CoMensha will always be just an approximation 
of the actual number of known victims in the Netherlands, because, for example, known victims are not 
all reported to CoMensha.23

The Rapporteur made recommendations to improve this situation in the Third, Fifth and Seventh re-
ports24. One of the action points in the National Action Plan on Human Trafficking (NAM)25 also addres-
ses this issue and questions have been asked in parliament about the matter.26 Thanks to improvements 

20 Until the end of 2007, CoMensha was known as the Foundation against Trafficking in Women (STV). 
For the reader’s convenience, this section always refers to CoMensha, even when the data concerned 
relate to the period when CoMensha was still called STV.

21 In addition to registering victims, CoMensha is also responsible for providing information to and arran-
ging shelter for victims. See also ‘Purpose of notification: (registration and) shelter’ later in this section.

22 In some cases, the data presented here differ from the figures in CoMensha’s annual reports. According 
to CoMensha, the data presented in the BNRM reports are the correct ones (information received in 
writing from CoMensha). 

23 Parties that can identify human trafficking may not all be familiar with CoMensha (as a reporting 
centre for victims of human trafficking), or are not aware that Dutch and underage victims should 
also be reported. In point of fact, only the police are obliged, pursuant to the B9 regulation, to report 
victims of human trafficking to CoMensha. Naturally, this obligation does not apply for Dutch victims. 
Nevertheless, it is important that also Dutch victims are being reported. 

24 NRM3, recommendation 27; NRM5, recommendation 62; NRM7, recommendation 42.
25 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 65.
26 Attachment to Parliamentary Proceedings II 2009/10, no. 805 (questions) and Attachment to Parliamentary Pro-

ceedings II 2009/10, no. 1297 (replies).



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
91

that have been made in this regard and the growing attention devoted to human trafficking in the last 
decade, it is likely that victims will be identified ánd reported more often in the future.27

At the same time, it is possible that the persons reported to CoMensha are not all actually victims, so 
the number of registered victims could also be higher than the actual number of known victims in the 
Netherlands. This is because there is no formal assessment based on specific criteria by which the regis-
tered person’s status as a victim can be verified.28

Furthermore, most victims do not report personally to CoMensha but are reported by agencies such as 
the police.29 Accordingly, CoMensha depends on the information provided by the notifier about the vic-
tim concerned. In many cases, this information consists of no more than the most basic details (gender, 
age, nationality), despite requests for further information.30 Since the registration of victims of human 
trafficking is a core task of CoMensha (partly for the benefit of BNRM), the Ministry of Justice has released 
additional funds to improve registration in accordance with the recommendations made by the Rap-
porteur in the Fifth and Seventh reports31 and in the NAM.32 The ensuing ‘Modernisation of Registration 
by CoMensha Project’33 was still underway at the time of writing.34

Finally, it should be noted that double-counting cannot be entirely ruled out in the statistics up to and 
including 2006.35

Number of reported victims
Figure 3.1 shows the trend in the number of victims reported to CoMensha each year in the last decade.36

27 Developments in the number of victims reported annually to CoMensha should therefore be seen in 
this context (which is also apparent from the replies to questions in parliament: Attachment to Parlia-
mentary Proceedings II 2008/09, no. 1753 (questions) and Attachment to Parliamentary Proceedings II 2008/09, 
no. 2023 (replies). 

28 CoMensha decides itself not to register a reported victim in the case of ‘very vague reports’. Howe-
ver, CoMensha has no firm criteria for defining a ‘vague report’ (information received verbally from 
CoMensha). 

29 See ‘Notifiers’ later in this section.
30 Accordingly, it was decided to present only these almost complete data in this report and to omit 

the data with large numbers of ‘missing values’ since they would not give a representative picture. An 
exception is only made for the sectors in which the reported victims were exploited. In light of the 
importance of this information, it was decided to report it even though for a substantial proportion 
of the victims the sector in which they were exploited is not known. 

31 NRM5, recommendation 61; NRM7, recommendation 41.
32 National Action Plan on Human Trafficking, action point 64.
33 BNRM is a member of the steering group.
34 The intention is to establish, together with the notifiers (the parties providing data) what dataset 

should be used (guided by the principle ‘less is more’) and to secure a commitment from the notifiers to 
supply these data consistently. 

35 Since 2006, CoMensha has received almost no reports of ‘anonymous victims’ (which could lead to 
double-counting). Previously it had. At the time, some notifiers did not provide the names of victims, 
which made it impossible to identify victims who had been counted twice (information received ver-
bally from CoMensha).

36 For the table with the detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the relative growth 
in relation to the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.1. 



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
92

Figure 3.1 Number of reported victims (2000-2009)

The number of victims reported to CoMensha annually has almost trebled in the last ten years (growing 
from 341 to 909). Up to and including 2005, the number fluctuated between 257 and 424, but has risen 
steadily since 2006.
The likely explanation for the increase is the intensification of investigations by the police and the public 
prosecution service (see § 2.6.3), as well as the growing attention to human trafficking (see § 2.7). It is 
also possible that there is greater awareness (and in more agencies)37 of the need to report victims of 
human trafficking to CoMensha.

Gender of reported victims
Figure 3.2 shows the distribution by gender of the victims reported to CoMensha each year in the period 
2000-2009.38

Figure 3.2 Gender of reported victims (2000-2009)

Scarcely any male victims were reported to CoMensha in the period up to and including 2005. That 
situation changed from 2006, very likely because of the criminalisation of exploitation in sectors other 
than the sex industry with effect from 1 January 2005 (see §§ 2.2.1 and 2.2.2).

37 There has been an increase in the number of new notifiers over the last decade (see Appendix 3, Table 
B3.9).

38 For the table with the detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.2. 

0 

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

800 

900 

1000 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

N
um

be
r

Year

Number of reported victims 

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Year
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Male

Female



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
93

The relatively large proportion of male victims in 2009 (15% compared with a maximum of 7% in the pe-
riod 2006-2008) can very probably be explained in part by the large number of men (mainly Romanians) 
who are believed to have been exploited on an asparagus farm in Someren.39 Of the 138 male victims in 
2009, 31 (22%) (including 25 Romanians) were exploited in agriculture and horticulture.40

Age of reported victims
Figure 3.3 shows the age distribution of the victims reported to CoMensha each year in the period 2001-
2009.41 It should be noted that the figure relates to the age of the victim at the time of the notification 
to CoMensha, which is often not the same as the victim’s age when he or she is believed to have first 
become a victim.42

Figure 3.3 Age of reported victims (2001-2009)

The ages of a relatively large proportion of the reported victims between 2001 and 2003 (between 16% 
and 42%) are unknown, so the following description of the trend in the age distribution only refers to 
the period since 2004.
The 18-23 age group is the largest every year, representing between 38% and 41% of all reported victims 
from 2004. The number of underage victims ranged from 5% (in 2005) to 28% (in 2007) and was lower 
in 2009 (12%) than in the three previous years.

Nationality of reported victims43

Table 3.1 ranks the five most common nationalities of victims reported to CoMensha each year in the 
last decade.

39 CoMensha Annual Report, 2009.
40 The case of the ‘Indonesian kitchen workers’ (see § 2.8.5 and NRM7, § 12.2) probably also had an impact 

on the high number of male victims in 2009. In that year, nine male Indonesian victims (7%) who were 
being exploited in the food industry were reported to CoMensha. For a full list of the nationalities of 
the male victims reported to CoMensha since 2006, see Appendix 3, Table B3.6. (In the period 2000-
2005, the share of male victims was 0%).

41 CoMensha has only also registered the age of victims reported to it since 2001. 
42 For a table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.3. 
43 See NRM1, § 4.3.1 for the countries of origin of the victims reported to CoMensha in the period 

1992-2000.

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

31 - 40 

41+ 

Unknown

24 - 30 

18 - 23 

15 - 17 

10 - 14 



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
94

Table 3.1 Ranking of the top 5 nationalities of reported victims (2000-2009)

2000
N=	
341

2001
N=	
284

2002
N=	
343

2003
N=	
257

2004
N=	
405

2005
N=	
424

2006
N=	
579

2007
N=	
716

2008
N=	
826

2009
N=	
909

2000-2009
N=508444

Dutch 2 5 4 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

Nigerian 1 4 2 3 4 3 2 2 3 2 2

Bulgarian 3’ 1 1 1 2 2 3 3 5 3

Romanian 3 2 3 4 4 3 4

Chinese 3’ 5 4 2 5

Hungarian 4 4

Sierra	Leonean 5 5

Czech 5

Russian 3’ 2 5 5

Ukrainian 3 4

Brazilian 5

Source: STV/CoMensha annual reports and databases.

Dutch has been the most common nationality of reported victims since 2004. Before then, the first 
place had been occupied for three years by victims with the Bulgarian nationality (2001-2003). Nigerian 
is the only nationality to appear in the top 5 in each of the 10 years reported here, and it occupies second 
place over the period as a whole. From 2006 on Chinese victims appeared again in the top 5 for the first 
time since 2000. However in 2009 they were just outside the top 5 - just like the Sierra Leonean victims. 
Hungarian is a noteworthy new entrant in the top 5 nationalities since 2008 and has now occupied fourth 
place for two years. Romanian was again one of the most common nationalities of victims in 2009, 
probably as a result of the alleged exploitation on the asparagus farm in Someren. CoMensha registered 
50 Romanian victims (men and women) who were exploited in the agriculture and horticulture sector 
in 2009.

Victims of a total of 115 different nationalities were reported to CoMensha in the last decade (excluding 
the category ‘unknown’). Figure 3.4 shows the trend in the top 5 nationalities overall in the period 
2000-2009.45 The top 5 nationalities overall are Dutch, Nigerian, Bulgarian, Romanian and Chinese (see 

44 Since the top 5 over the entire ten-year period is based on the absolute number of reported victims 
(N=5084), the later years, when more victims were reported than in previous years, logically have a 
greater influence on the overall top 5. It is important to bear this in mind, especially since the increase 
in the number of victims reported each year is probably due more to the increased attention for human 
trafficking than to an increase in the actual number of victims (see earlier in this section under ‘Number 
of reported victims’)

45 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including all other nationalities, 
the top 5 nationalities by year and the top 10 overall), see Appendix 3, Table B3.4.



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
95

Table 3.1, last column), although these five nationalities do not make up the top 5 in each individual 
year (see Table 3.1).46

Figure 3.4 Trend in the overall top 5 nationalities of reported victims (2000-2009)

The proportion of Dutch victims has increased greatly in the last decade (from 7% in 2000 to 26% in 
2009). This increase started in 2004. Dutch has been the most common nationality since that year (see 
Table 3.1). A possible explanation for this development is the growing concern about human trafficking 
(see § 2.7), including the growing attention to the specific problem of loverboys (see § 2.4.4).47 The largest 
number of Dutch victims was reported in 2008 (N=320=39%), whereupon in 2009 the number declined 
for the first time since 2003 (in both absolute and relative terms).
The proportion of Nigerian victims has fluctuated in the last 10 years from a minimum of 5% in 2001 to 
a maximum of 15% in 2006. Bulgarian is, on average, the third most common nationality of victims, at 
9%, but the percentage of Bulgarians declined steadily after 2006 to just 4% in 2008 and 2009. There was 
a sudden increase in reports of Chinese victims in 2008 and of Romanian victims in 2009.48

Nationality of reported underage victims
This section looks specifically at the nationalities of underage victims of human trafficking. Figure 3.3 
shows that the proportion of minors among all victims each year fluctuated between 12% and 28% in the 
period 2006-2009.49 Table 3.2 shows the five most common nationalities of underage victims reported 
to CoMensha in each year between 2006 and 2009.50 51

46 For example, we can see from Figure 3.4 that in 2001 the five nationalities that constitute the top 5 
overall only accounted for 28% of the 284 reported victims, while the top 5 for 2001 (consisting of 
Bulgarian (14%), Russian (10%), Ukrainian (6%), Nigerian (5%) and Dutch (4%)) represented 39% of the 
284 reported victims (see Appendix 3, Table B3.4).

47 Awareness that Dutch victims should also be reported to CoMensha has also grown. 
48 As already noted, this can be explained by the alleged exploitation on the asparagus farm in Someren.
49 See also Appendix 3, Table B3.3. 
50 CoMensha has registered the age of reported victims since 2001 but the link between nationality and 

age can only be made from 2006 on, since that is the year when BNRM started using databases supplied 
by CoMensha rather than just its annual reports (see ‘Research method’ earlier in this section). 

51 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including the absolute and relative 
numbers of all nationalities in a year, the top 5 each year and the top 5 overall), see Appendix 3, Table B3.5. 

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Chinese

Romanian

Bulgarian

Nigerian

Dutch



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
96

Table 3.2 Ranking of top 5 nationalities of reported underage victims (2006-2009)

2006 2007 2008 2009 2006-2009

Dutch 1 1 1 1 1

Nigerian 2 2 5 2 2

Chinese 3’ 5’ 2 5 3

Guinean 3 3 4

Sierra	Leonean 3’ 5’ 4 4 5

Romanian 3

Bulgarian 5 4

Source: STV/CoMensha databases.

During the period shown here, the top 5 nationalities are the same almost every year. Dutch comes first 
every year, generally followed by West African nationalities (Nigerian, Guinean and Sierra Leonean) and 
Chinese. Guinean entered the top 5 in 2008, the year in which East European nationalities (Romanian 
and Bulgarian) disappeared from the rankings.
Table B3.5 in Appendix 3 shows that an average of 52% of all underage victims were Dutch52 and 17% were 
Nigerian53 in the period 2006-2009. These two nationalities headed the list by some distance.54

We investigated whether there is any difference between the proportion of underage victims among 
Dutch victims and among Nigerians or other non-Dutch victims. Figure 3.5 presents the results for the 
period 2006-2009.55

There were significantly more underage victims among Nigerian victims in 2006 (37%) and 2007 (48%) 
than among Dutch victims (2006: 24% and 2007: 37%) and other non-Dutch victims (2006: 10% and 2007: 
14%). These differences are very significant.56

Remarkably, the proportion of underage victims among Nigerian victims was smallest in 2008 (11% com-
pared with 13% among other non-Dutch victims and 33% among Dutch victims), having fallen dramatically 
from 48% in 2007. The reason for this decline was probably the successful completion of the Koolvis investi-

52 Underage Dutch victims of human trafficking are often linked with the loverboy problem (for more 
about this problem, see § 2.4; NRM1, § 4.4.2; NRM3, § 3.2.2; NRM5, § 3.4; and NRM7, § 9.4.3). However, 
not all underage Dutch victims are victims of loverboys and adults can also be victims of loverboys 
(especially since the age of victims registered by CoMensha is their age at the time of notification and 
not their age when they first became a victim). Two of the 63 underage Dutch victims in 2009 were male 
and there were no underage male Dutch victims in the period 2006-2008.

53 Underage Nigerian victims of human trafficking are often linked to unaccompanied underage Nigerian 
aliens who disappear to an unknown destination from reception centers (for more information about 
this, see § 2.4; NRM1, § 4.4.2; NRM7, § 9.5).

54 In relation to the other nationalities in the top 5: Chinese (5%) and Guinean and Sierra Leonean (both 
4%).

55 For the table with the detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.7. 
56 2006: p<0.01; 2007: p<0.01.



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
97

gation into a major Nigerian human trafficking network in October 2007.57 In 2009, as in 2008, the propor-
tion of underage victims was by far the largest among Dutch victims. These differences are very significant.58

Figure 3.5  Proportion of underage victims among Dutch, Nigerian and other non-Dutch  
reported victims (2006-2009)

Sectors in which victims were exploited
Since the criminalisation of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry in 2005 (see §§ 2.2.1 and 
2.2.2), CoMensha now registers the sector in which a victim was (allegedly) exploited. BNRM has this 
information for the period since 2007, which is presented in Figure 3.6.59 The category ‘Exploitation, 
other’ could refer to a form of exploitation in the sex industry or in another sector.60

Figure 3.6 Sectors in which victims were exploited (2007-2009)61

57 For more information about the Koolvis investigation, see NRM7, § 9.5.5.
58 2008: p<0.01; 2009: p<0.01.
59 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of the data (including a breakdown by gender and 

the different forms of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry), see Appendix 3, Table B3.8.
60 The sector in which victims in the category ‘Exploitation, other’ were exploited is known. These cases 

involve a sector for which there is no separate category in the CoMensha register (so they are generally 
sectors in which cases have never or only very occasionally occurred previously). Since the share of 
‘Exploitation, other’ is 5% in 2009, this category should be defined more precisely in the future. 

61 No victims of forced organ donation have been reported to CoMensha up to now, with the exception of 
one Indian male victim in 2007 (see NRM7, § 13.3.3). This incident cannot be seen in Figure 3.6 because 
the proportion has been rounded off to 0%. 

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Proportion of underage victims 
among Nigerian victims

Proportion of underage victims 
among other non-Dutch victims

Proportion of underage victims 
among Dutch victims

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2007 2008 2009 

Year

Not (yet) exploited

Exploitation, other

Unknown

Exploitation in 
sectors other than 
the sex industry

Exploitation in 
the sex industry



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
98

Every year, for roughly 30% of the victims, it is not known whether they have been exploited or, if they 
were exploited, in which sector. What can be stated, in any case, is that in the period 2007-2009 between 
7% and 15% of the reported victims at least had not actually been exploited because they had not yet 
worked.
At least half of the reported victims were exploited in the sex industry (50%). Of the 343 victims who were 
exploited in the sex industry in 2007, a quarter were underage (N=84). In 2008, underage victims in the 
sex industry accounted for a fifth (93 of the 475) and in 2009 for a tenth (4562 of the 423).
The minimum percentage of victims who were exploited in a sector other than the sex industry63 rose 
to 12% in 2009 (compared with 4% in 2007 and 3% in 2008).64 This can be explained mainly by the incre-
ased efforts to investigate exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and the greater attention 
to this phenomenon (see § 2.7). These forms of exploitation are being discovered and recognised more 
frequently.65 As already noted in § 3.2.2, these are often situations where an investigation reveals a 
relatively large number of victims and which therefore have a significant impact on the overall figures.
The suspected exploitation on the asparagus farm in Someren in 2009 is a good example of this (see also 
under gender of reported victims (Figure 3.2) and nationality of reported victims (Table 3.1 and Figure 
3.4)). In 57 (35%) of the 161 cases of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry in the period 
2007-2009, the exploitation occurred in the agriculture and horticulture sector; 56 of these cases were 
in 2009.66 Consequently, since 2009 the agriculture and horticulture sector has been the predominant 
sector outside the sex industry for suspected exploitation, while in 2007 and 2008 there were almost no 
reported situations of exploitation in those sectors. The main sectors outside the sex industry where 
exploitation occurred in the period covered, after agriculture and horticulture, were domestic work (33 
victims (20%) in the period 2007-2009) and the hospitality sector (19 victims (12%) in the period 2007-
2009) (and with cases divided more evenly over the years).

Notifiers
Since 2001, CoMensha has registered the person or agency that has reported a victim to it. Figures 3.7a 
and b show where most reports of victims came from in 2001 and 2009 (the top 5).67

62 Of whom 27 had Dutch nationality.
63 Such as agriculture and horticulture, domestic work, hospitality, construction, the food industry, drug 

dealing, etc. (see Appendix 3, Table B3.8). 
64 None of the reported victims who were exploited in sectors other than the sex industry had Dutch 

nationality, with the exception of four Dutch victims in 2009 who were exploited in drug dealing.
65 This trend will probably continue in the future.
66 These 56 suspected victims were 25 Romanian men, 25 Romanian women, four Portuguese men and 

two Polish men. The average age of the victims was significantly higher (35.11 years old; Sd: 9.55; 
N=56) than the age of the victims who were not exploited in agriculture and horticulture in 2009 
(24.80 years old; Sd: 8.11; N=840 (the age of 13 of them is not known)). This result is very significant: 
p<0.01.

67 For the table with the complete overview of these data (including all other notifiers, the data for the 
period 2002-2008 and the top 5 overall), see Appendix 3, Table B3.9.



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
99

Figure 3.7a Notifiers (2001)

Figure 3.7b Notifiers (2009)

By far the largest number of notifications in every year from 2001 to 2009 came from the police, whose 
share of all annual notifications ranged from 47% (in 2004) to 61% (in 2009).68 Interestingly, Figures 3.7a 
and b show that, with the exception of the police, the five leading notifiers in 2001 no longer appear in 
the top 5 in 2009. However, that does not mean that they no longer report victims.69 The figures also 
show that the top 5 notifiers in 2009 together account for 92% of all the notifications, which is more 
than the corresponding figure of 72% in 2001. The notifiers70 and their shares of notifications vary over 
the years. Appendix 3, Table B3.9 provides more details on this.

Purpose of notification: (registration ánd) shelter
As described in the introduction to this section, victims are reported to CoMensha for various reasons. One 
of the reasons is for registration and shelter.71 Of the 909 victims reported in 2009, 201 were reported for 
the purposes of securing shelter. Of those 201 victims requiring shelter, 166 (83%) were also found a place in 

68 Note: from 2007 the number of notifications in a single year is no longer the same as the number of 
reported victims in a single year (see the explanation for this in Appendix 3, Table B3.9).

69 In 2009, another seven reports came from ‘shelter facilities’, 18 from ‘individuals’, four from ‘refugee/
asylum organisations’ and eleven from ‘youth care services’.

70 Some notifiers have disappeared over the years and others, such as the SIOD in 2009, have appeared. 36 
of the 48 SIOD notifications in 2009 concerned victims discovered in the agriculture and horticulture 
sector (Someren case).

71 It is for the first time that BNRM reports this kind of information. That is why only the year 2009 is reported.  

48% 

8% 
6% 

6% 

4% 

28% 

Individual

Youth care services

Other noti�ers 
(6 - including unknown/anonymous)

Shelter facility

Police

Refugee/asylum worker

61% 17% 

6% 

5% 

3% 
8% 

Other organisations

Royal Netherlands 
Marechaussee

Networks for victims of 
human tracking 

Police

Social Intelligence and 
Investigation Service (SIOD)

Other notiers (7)



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
100

a shelter – 16 of them in emergency accommodation because of a lack of suitable places.72 Figure 3.8 shows 
who reported the victims that required shelter in 2009 (total of 208 notifications of 201 different victims).73

Figure 3.8 Purpose of notification: (registration ánd) shelter (2009)

Three-quarters of the victims who were reported for the purpose of registration and shelter in 2009 were 
reported by the police. The other victims requiring shelter were notified mainly by networks for human 
trafficking victims and the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee.

3.3.2 Victims and the B9 regulation
Non-Dutch (potential) victims and witnesses74 of human trafficking without a residence permit can claim 
a temporary residence permit on the basis of Chapter 9 of the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines75 if, 
after a reflection period of up to three months, they cooperate with the investigation and prosecution 
by the police and/or the public prosecution service.76 This temporary residence permit gives them access 
to certain services (reception, shelter, medical assistance, legal advice and special facilities to support 
themselves). As regards non-Dutch victims who are living legally in the Netherlands, the B9 regulation 
provides as follows: ‘For the sake of completeness, it should be noted that nationals of the EU and EEA 
and Swiss nationals can also derive rights from the provisions and procedure laid down in this chapter 
insofar as they do not have rights under Community law’.77

In the Netherlands, requests for residence permits under the B9 regulation are submitted to the Im-
migration and Naturalisation Service (IND), which makes a decision on them. Reporting the crime of 

72 Annual report CoMensha, 2009
73 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including the other purposes of 

notification by notifier), see Appendix 3, Table B3.10.
74 For the reader’s convenience, elsewhere in this section the term ‘victims’ will be used. 
75 For the reader’s convenience, elsewhere in this section the term ‘B9 regulation’ will be used. The terms 

B9 applications and B9 awards are used for applications for a temporary residence permit on the basis 
of the B9 regulation and the granting of a temporary residence permit, respectively.

76 Until 14 November 2007, reporting a crime was a requirement. Since then it has also been sufficient 
for victims to cooperate in some other way with the investigation and prosecution (witnesses are still 
required to report a crime).

77 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 2000, B9 (April 2001). For more information about the B9 regulation, 
see § 2.5.1

74%

11%

9%

7%

Royal Netherlands 
Marechaussee

Networks of victims of 
human tra�cking

Police

Other notiers (5)



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
101

human trafficking or otherwise cooperating with the police and/or public prosecution service78 is regar-
ded ex officio as an application for a B9 residence permit.79 B9 applications are therefore always submitted 
to the IND by the police.

Research method
The information in this subsection (3.3.2) is based on the databases delivered each year by the IND to the 
BNRM, containing records of all contacts in which the B9 regulation played a role. Information about 
individual victims can be derived from these databases (‘secondary analysis’).80 Because of omissions in 
the system, caused by the transfer of the aliens administration system from the aliens police to the IND, 
no figures can be reported for 2003 and 2004.
For explanatory notes to the figures and tables in this section, the additional tables in Appendix 3 and 
the statistics applicable to them, see Appendix 2.

Remarks about the figures
IND records contain the details of all victims who have submitted an application for B9 status and who 
have been granted a B9 residence permit. However, the number of victims selected on the basis of the B9 
regulation from the IND records is probably not precisely the same as the number of victims who made 
an application under that regulation.
The number selected may be lower than the actual number because the IND has no standard and man-
datory procedure for registering applications under the B9 regulation.81 It is therefore possible that 
victims who invoke the B9 regulation cannot all be traced. The Rapporteur has made a number of recom-
mendations to improve the IND’s registration of initial B9 applications and B9 awards and of decisions 
made on objections and on subsequent appeals.82 At the time of writing, the IND was developing a new 
registration system called INDIGO.

78 Reporting a crime is often a very emotional experience (other forms of cooperation are probably less 
so) and victims fear an ultimate acquittal (sometimes because of a feeling of ‘inequality of arms’), which 
can lead to ‘secondary victimisation’ (NRM1, § 4.5; NRM7, § 4.5).

79 However, there are signs that in practice victims are not always informed of the possibilities afforded 
by the B9 regulation (or of the reflection period of up to three months). This is because some police 
forces were or are unclear about the options and the applicability of the B9 regulation, particularly with 
respect to non-Dutch victims who are living legally in the Netherlands. This is probably almost never 
the case any longer.

80 After all, a victim might be pursuing various procedures (and have various contacts in each procedure) 
with the IND.

81 A person who applies for a B9 residence permit is sometimes registered as receiving a residence permit 
on other grounds (for example ‘residence with partner’ or ‘working in the EU’). The opposite also 
sometimes occurs: a B9 residence permit is granted to a person who had not applied for one at the 
time of the initial registration. Persons who are linked to the B9 regulation either in the application 
for or the granting of a permit are included in the selection. The figures concerning B9 applications 
and B9 awards in this section could in fact differ somewhat from the IND’s figures due to the fact that 
victims who are at any time linked to the B9 regulation and are also pursuing another procedure with 
the IND (for residence for another purpose) might not be registered under the B9 regulation since the 
IND classifies persons according to the first stated purpose of residence. 

82 NRM7, recommendation 45.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
102

At the same time, the selected number could also be higher than the actual number of victims that have 
invoked the B9 regulation because the IND sometimes mistakenly registers an application for a residence 
permit on other grounds as a B9 application.83 Furthermore, the selected number includes both victims 
and witnesses of human trafficking84 and occasionally the children of victims and witnesses are mista-
kenly registered as having submitted a B9 application themselves.
It also has to be borne in mind that a B9 application is not always dealt with in the same year as the ap-
plication is made.85 Consequently, the numbers of B9 applications and B9 awards in each year do not 
cover a cohort and can therefore not be compared with each other. Finally, it has to be noted that no 
information is provided to the IND relating to the reflection period offered to victims.

Number of B9 applications
Figure 3.9 shows the trend in the annual number of B9 applications86 over the period 2000-200987.88

Figure 3.9 Number of B9 applications (2000-2009)89

The number of B9 applications increased almost four-fold over the last decade (from 77 to 29990). 
The number of applications rose every year, with the exception of a drop in the period 2003-2005. In 
some years the number rose very steeply (134% in 2006) and in others only very slightly (3% in 2007). 

83 These B9 applications are reported as ‘incorrectly entered B9 application’.
84 The IND makes no distinction between them.
85 There are other options in addition to granting or rejecting B9 applications. For example, the B9 ap-

plication might be withdrawn by the victim, the victim might disappear, it might be decided not to start 
or to halt the investigation or the prosecution (NRM3 § 3.5.2). There are also the previously mentioned 
‘incorrectly entered applications’.

86 The numbers only represent ‘initial’ B9 applications and awards. Applications for extensions of B9 
permits are ignored here.

87 With the exception of 2003 and 2004. See under ‘Research method’ earlier in this section. 
88 For the table with the detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the relative growth 

in relation to the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.11.
89 In NRM7, the number of B9 applications in 2008 is incorrectly reported as 443.
90 In 2009, 18 of the 299 B9 applications were ultimately found to have been incorrectly entered. There 

were therefore actually 281 B9 applications in that year (at most, since six of the 281 B9 applications in 
2009 were not handled in that year). 

0 

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

2000 2001 2002 2003/04 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

N
um

be
r

Year

B9 applications to the 
Immigration and 
Naturalisation Service (IND)

Non-Dutch victims 
reported to CoMensha



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
103

In the last two years there has been a steady increase of around 25% a year. Since 2005, the trend in 
the number of B9 applications has followed the trend in the number of non-Dutch victims registered 
by CoMensha.91

Since 14 November 2007, forms of cooperation with the police and/or the public prosecution service 
other than the previously required report of human trafficking should be officially regarded as a B9 ap-
plication. This is not reflected in the figures. A possible explanation for this is that even before that date 
the police formally regarded this type of cooperation as an application for B9 status.92

Number of B9 awards
Figure 3.10 shows how many B9 residence permits were granted each year in the last decade.93,94 These 
data cannot be compared with the annual numbers of applications for B9 status since applications are 
not all dealt with in the year the application is made.95,96

Figure 3.10 Number of B9 awards (2000-2009)

The number of B9 awards increased substantially in the period 2000-2009 (index figure 5.1). As is to be 
expected,97 during the shown period , the trend was largely the same as for the annual number of B9 ap-
plications (see Figure 3.9). In 2009, a record number of 280 B9 permits were awarded. In that year, seven 

91 It should be noted that the number of non-Dutch victims reported to CoMensha is not directly compa-
rable with the number of victims who made a B9 application to the IND, if only because the submission 
of a B9 application can be preceded by a three-month reflection period.

92 Information received verbally from the police, meeting of the National Expert Group on Human Traf-
ficking (LEM), 20 February 2008 (not published). 

93 With the exception of 2003 and 2004. See ‘Research method’ earlier in this section. Naturally, this also 
applies for the other data in this section.

94 The numbers represent all B9 awards (even if B9 status was only granted at a later stage, for example 
after an objection or an appeal procedure) in response to ‘initial’ applications. Applications for exten-
sion of a B9 residence permit that were granted are not included here.

95 See ‘Remarks about the figures’ earlier in this section.
96 For the table with the detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the relative growth 

in relation to the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.12.
97 Although the annual number of B9 applications and B9 awards do not cover a cohort, the vast majority 

of the applications in a year are also handled in that same year – usually by granting B9 status.

0 

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

700 

2000 2001 2002 2003/04 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

N
um

be
r

Year

B9 awards



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
104

(2%) of the total of 287 applications dealt with were rejected. The grounds on which the applications 
were rejected are not known.98

Gender of victims granted a B9 permit
Figure 3.11 shows the distribution by gender of the victims granted B9 status between 2000 and 2009.99

Figure 3.11 Gender of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)

Between 2000 and 2005, the proportion of male victims granted B9 status was very small (2% to 3%). The 
expansion of the human trafficking article in 2005 that, among other things, criminalised exploitation 
in sectors other than the sex industry100 probably explains the increase in the number of B9 awards for 
male victims from 2006 on (10% to 11%). In 2009, roughly a fifth of the B9 awards were for male victims 
(19%). That corresponds with the rise in the number of male victims of human trafficking reported to 
CoMensha in 2009 (see Figure 3.2).

Age of victims granted B9 status
Figure 3.12 shows the age distribution of victims granted B9 status between 2000 and 2009.101

Figure 3.12 Age of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)

98 If an application is not granted, it does not necessarily mean that the application was rejected. The 
application could also have been dealt with in another way (see ‘Remarks about the figures’ earlier in 
this section).

99 For the table with the detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.13.
100 See §§ 2.2.1 and 2.2.2.
101 For the table with the detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.14.

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003/04 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Female

Male

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003/04 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

31 - 40

26 - 30

41+

18 - 25

11 - 17

0 - 10



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
105

On average, at least half (53%) of the victims who were granted B9 status were aged between 18 and 25. 
Almost 40% of the victims granted B9 status were older, and half of them were between the ages of 26 
and 30 (19%). The other victims granted B9 status (almost 10%) were minors.102

There has been a slight shift towards the older age groups: between 71% and 79% were younger than 
26 in the period 2000-2002 and between 52% and 65% were younger than 26 in the period 2005-2009. 
Relatively speaking, the number of minors was smallest in 2009 (4%).

Nationality of victims granted B9 status
Table 3.3 ranks the five most common nationalities of victims granted B9 status in the last decade.

Table 3.3 Ranking of top 5 nationalities of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)

2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2000-2009

Nigerian 1 4 3 5 1 1 1 1 1
Bulgarian 2 1 1 1 3 4 2
Chinese 5 3 2 3 3
Sierra	Leonean 5’ 2 4 2 3 2 4
Romanian 3’ 2 3 2 5
Guinean 4 4’
Ghanaian 4’
Hungarian 5
Moroccan 5
Russian 3’ 2’ 5’ 4
Moldavian 4
Ukrainian 2’
Czech 5 5

Source: IND databases

In 2000 and from 2006, most B9 residence permits were granted to victims with the Nigerian nationality. 
Prior to 2006, the first place had been occupied in at least three years by Bulgarians (2001, 2002 and 2005). 
Russian victims regularly occupied a position in the top 5 at the beginning of the decade, but have not done 
so since 2006. Recent newcomers in the annual top 5 are Guineans (since 2008) and Ghanaians (since 2009).

Victims who have been granted B9 status in the last decade have represented a total of 81 different na-
tionalities (excluding the categories ‘unknown’ and ‘stateless’). Figure 3.13 shows the trend in the top 5 
nationalities overall in the period 2000-2009.103 The top 5 nationalities overall are Nigerian, Bulgarian, 
Chinese, Sierra Leonean and Romanian (see Table 3.3, last column), although these five nationalities do 
not make up the top 5 in each individual year (see Table 3.3).104

102 Among the minors, children of victims were occasionally, and mistakenly, also registered as recipients 
of B9 status. In each of the years 2007, 2008 and 2009 one of the registered minors shared a file with 
an adult victim, which is a strong indication of a parent-child relationship. 

103 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including all other nationalities, 
the top 5 in each year and the top 10 overall), see Appendix 3, Table B3.15).

104 For example, we can see from Figure 3.13 that only three of the five nationalities that constitute the top 
5 overall appear in 2000 (jointly accounting for 40%). The top 5 in 2000 are Nigerian (16%), Bulgarian 



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
106

Figure 3.13 Trend in the overall top 5 nationalities of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)

The share of B9 residence permits granted to Nigerian victims was more than twice as large in the 
second half of the decade as in the first half (averaging 10% in the period 2000-2002 and in 2005 
compared with an average of 22% in the period 2006-2009). The proportion of Bulgarians granted B9 
status actually peaked in the first period (with a record of 28% in 2002), but has since fallen dramatically 
(to 2% in 2009). In relative terms, the number of Chinese victims granted B9 status has been steadily 
increasing, although in 2009 the number declined for the first time. The percentage of B9 residence 
permits granted to Sierra Leonean and Romanian victims has fluctuated. After almost disappearing 
from the statistics in 2008 (1%), the share of B9 residence permits granted to Romanians rose again 
to 5% in 2009.

Region of origin of victims granted B9 status
Figure 3.14 shows the breakdown of victims granted B9 status by region of origin.105, 106

Figure 3.14 Region of origin of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)

(13%), Romanian (11%), Russian (11%) and Czech (7%) - total 58% (See Appendix 3, Table 3.15).
105 Only the regions of origin of victims granted B9 status in the period 2000-2009 are shown.
106 For the table with the detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.16. From 2005, a distinc-

tion is also made in this table between countries within Europe; that is to say between countries that 
were member states of the EU in 1995, countries that joined the EU in 2004 or 2007, non-EU countries 
in Eastern Europe and non- EU countries in Western Europe. 

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

2000 2001 2002 2003/04 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Sierra Leonean

Chinese

Romanian

Bulgarian

Nigerian

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003/04 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Unknown & 
Stateless

Asia

Latin America & 
Caribbean

Africa

Europe



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
107

Most victims granted B9 status in the last decade came from Africa (41%) and Europe (39%). The remai-
ning 20% came predominantly from Asia (16%). There has been an evident shift over time from Europe 
to Africa and Asia. Up to and including 2005, the vast majority (between 64% in 2005 and 82% in 2001) 
of persons granted B9 status still came from Europe, whereas Europeans only accounted for 15% in 2008 
and 19% in 2009.107 Meanwhile, Africa and Asia have become increasingly important regions of origin 
over the years. Latin America and the Caribbean only appear occasionally as a region of origin.

Police regions from which successful B9 applications are made
When a non-Dutch victim of human trafficking without a legal status in the Netherlands reports the 
crime of human trafficking or otherwise cooperates with the police, it is regarded ex officio as an appli-
cation for a temporary residence permit on the grounds of the B9 regulation. Figures 3.15a and b show 
the police regions that submitted most B9 applications to the IND that have led to B9 awards in 2001 
and 2009 (top 5).108

Figure 3.15a Police regions from which successful B9 applications were made (2000)

Figure 3.15b Police regions from which successful B9 applications were made (2009)

107 The B9 recipients from Europe come mainly from the new EU member states and East European coun-
tries that are not members of the EU (see Appendix 3, Table B3.16).

108 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including all other police regions, 
the data for 2001-2008 and the top 5 overall), see Appendix 3, Table B3.17. 

20% 

11% 

11% 

9% 9% 

40% 

Groningen

Ro�erdam-Rijnmond

Amsterdam-Amstelland

Drenthe

Haaglanden

Other police regions 
(12 - including unknown)

12% 

10% 

9% 

7% 

6% 

56% 

Groningen

Kennemerland

Haaglanden

Friesland

Ro�erdam-Rijnmond

Other police regions 
(18 - including unknown)



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
108

Over the entire period 2000-2009, the Haaglanden police region is the region that submitted the largest 
number of B9 applications (132) that were granted (in 2000 the region was still in fifth place, but it came 
first in 2009). Haaglanden is closely followed by the Amsterdam-Amstelland police region (130), but that 
region no longer appeared in the top 5 in 2009.109 The figures show that the police regions in the top 5 
vary over the years (as do their relative shares of successful applications), although some police regions 
are represented more consistently than others. For more details, see Appendix 3, Table B3.17.

3.3.3 Victims and compensation
Victims of human trafficking can receive compensation for material loss and/or emotional injury. One of 
the possibilities110 is for the judge to make an order to pay compensation, on an application or ex officio, 
separately or in combination with the (partial) award of the injured party’s claim for compensation111 
(see § 2.8.3). If a compensation order is made, the compensation is collected for the victim by the Central 
Fines Collection Agency (CJIB).

Research method
At BNRM’s request, the CJIB has provided data about compensation orders made in human trafficking 
cases.112 These are anonymous data at case level; in other words, cases involving anonymous individuals 
who have been irrevocably113 convicted of at least human trafficking.

Number of compensation orders made
Figure 3.16 shows, over the period 2000-2009, the trend in the number of cases each year in which a 
compensation order was made. The number of victims on whose behalf the compensation orders were 
made is also shown for each year.114

Figure 3.16 Number of compensation orders made (2000-2009)

109 The Haaglanden and Amsterdam-Amstelland police regions together accounted for 22% of all B9 ap-
plications that were granted in the period 2000-2009 (see Appendix 3, Table B3.17).

110 For a list of the possibilities, see NRM5, pp. 58 et seq.
111 If a claim for compensation is awarded, a compensation order is almost always also imposed (see 

NRM7, § 11.10.2). However, claims for compensation are regularly rejected or declared inadmissible by 
a judge (usually because the claim is manifestly ‘not simple in nature’). See NRM7, § 11.10.3. 

112 When studying the figures, it should be borne in mind that the victims on whose behalf a compensa-
tion order is made represent only a very small proportion of all victims of human trafficking.

113 The cases only reach the CJIB when the judgment has become final. This can sometimes be in the same 
year as the offence was committed, but can also be years later. 

114 For the table with the detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the relative growth 
in relation to the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.18.

0 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

N
um

be
r

Year

Number 
of cases

Number of 
victims 
concerned



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
109

In the period from 2000 to 2003, the number of human trafficking cases in which a final and irrevocable 
decision had been rendered and the CJIB was involved in collecting compensation was between three 
and five. From 2004, the number was significantly higher (between nine and 18 cases). Most cases (71 of 
the 96 cases - 74%) involved a claim for one victim. In all, the 96 cases involved 140 victims.

Compensation orders by amount awarded
Figure 3.17 shows the amounts awarded in compensation orders made by the courts, which therefore 
have to be collected from the convicted person by the CJIB.115

Figure 3.17 Compensation orders by amount awarded (2000-2009)

The amounts awarded – per case, not per victim – do not generally exceed €5000.

Compensation orders by disposition116

Figure 3.18 shows whether, and if so how, the compensation orders made during the entire period 2000-
2009 had been disposed of on the reference date of 12 May 2010.117

Figure 3.18 Compensation orders by disposition (total from 2000-2009)

115 For the table with the detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.19.
116 The method of disposition refers to the final action taken by the CJIB, whereupon the CJIB closes the case. 

If an alternative custodial sentence has been imposed, for example, the convicted person is still obliged to 
pay the victim the compensation ordered by the court. However, the CJIB is no longer involved. As far as 
the CJIB is concerned, the case is closed even though the convicted person has still not paid the amount. 

117 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including the breakdown of the 
data by year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.20. 

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

25,001 - 35,000 (€)

15,001 - 25,000 (€)

more than 35,000 (€)

5,001 - 15,000 (€)

501 - 5,000 (€)

1 - 500 (€)

44% 

11% 
3% 

42% 

Other

Alternative custodial 
sentence

Payment in full

N.a. (open)



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
110

Collecting compensation is a time-consuming business, as is apparent from the large proportion (42%) 
of cases that are still open from earlier years.118 Nevertheless, a change for the better can be observed in 
this regard when these data are compared with the figures BNRM received from the CJIB last year.119 Last 
year there were 41 open cases (in the period 2000-2008) out of a total of 78 cases (53%), while now there 
are 40120 (in the period 2000-2009) open cases out of a total of 96 (42%). The same positive trend can be 
seen in the number of cases where payment has been made in full. Whereas only 26 of the 78 cases (33%) 
had been settled with payment in full last year, compensation had been paid in full in 42 of the 96 cases 
(44%) this year. Examples of the occasional cases that fall into the category ‘other’ might be the barring 
of a case due to lapse of time or a settlement between the convicted person and the victim.
In the last decade, a total of 11 cases have been disposed of with an ‘alternative custodial sentence’. In 
these cases the convicted perpetrator has not paid the full compensation and the public prosecution 
service has ordered that he or she must serve the alternative custodial sentence that the judge imposed at 
the time of sentencing. The period of custody is not a substitute for the compensation but is intended as a 
means of exerting pressure. However, if this produces no result, the CJIB’s involvement in the matter does 
end and it is then left to the victim to collect the money. The victim is given a warrant with which he or she 
can authorise a bailiff to enforce the order (but which in fact leaves the victim practically empty-handed).

Compensation orders by amount paid
Figure 3.19 shows the amounts that had been collected in the cases where a compensation order had 
been made in the period 2000-2009 on the reference date of 12 May 2010.121

Figure 3.19 Compensation orders by amount paid (total from 2000-2009)

The cases where no money has yet been collected might be cases that are still open but could also be 
cases where, for example, an alternative custodial sentence had been enforced because it had not been 
possible to collect some or all of the money. The cases where a sum of money has been collected might 

118 The fact that a case is still open does not mean that nothing has been paid. The court might, for 
example, decide that the compensation can be paid in installments, or the CJIB might, in certain cases, 
decide to reach a settlement (subject to strict conditions). 

119 See NRM7 § 4.4.
120 Of which 17 cases date from before 2007. There is even one case from 2001 and one case from 2002 still 

open. The majority of the open cases are therefore (probably) cases from the most recent years.
121 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including the data broken down 

by year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.21. 

22% 

12% 

55% 

10% 
1% 

1 - 500 (€)

501 - 5000 (€)

15,001 - 25,000 (€)

0 (€)

5001 - 15,000 (€)



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
111

be cases that have been disposed of, but could also be open cases, for example, where some of the money 
has already been paid (see the total of 40 open cases and the 21 cases in which nothing has yet been paid 
in Appendix 2, Tables B3.20 and B3.21).

3.3.4 Summary
Table 3.4 presents the key data concerning victims that have been discussed in § 3.3 in a single table. It 
should be noted here that the figures come from three different sources (CoMensha, IND and CJIB) and 
do not cover a cohort so they cannot be compared with each other.

Table 3.4 Overview of data on victims

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total

CoMensha:	number	of		
victims	reported	

341 284 343 257 405 424 579 716 826 909 5084

IND:	number	of	victims	
granted	a	B9		
residence	permit	

55 122 127 61 150 143 235 280 1173

CJIB:	number	of	victims		
on	whose	behalf	a		
compensation	order		
has	been	made

7 8 5 3 24 20 10 18 16 29 140

Victims in the CoMensha register
– A total of 5084 possible victims of human trafficking were reported to CoMensha in the period 2000-

2009. The annual number has almost trebled in the last decade (from 341 to 909), mainly thanks to 
the growing attention for human trafficking.

– Since 2006, when exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry was criminalised, male victims 
have also been reported to CoMensha. In 2009, males actually accounted for 15% of the reported 
victims (compared with 5% to 7% in the period 2006-2008). This increase is partially explained by the 
large number of men discovered on the asparagus farm in Someren.

– Almost 40% of all reported victims in the last decade were aged between 18 and 23, and 15% were 
minors. The proportion of underage victims in 2009 (12%) was lower than in the three preceding 
years (between 18% and 28%).

– Dutch victims were reported most frequently in the period 2000-2009. The second most common 
nationality was Nigerian, followed by two East European nationalities (Bulgarian and Romanian). 
Chinese victims completed the top 5.

– The top 5 nationalities of reported underage victims between 2006 and 2009 were Dutch, West Afri-
can (Nigerian, Guinean and Sierra Leonean) and Chinese (in third place).

 A significantly larger proportion of Nigerian victims were underage than among victims of other 
nationalities in 2006-2007. Since 2008, the proportion of underage victims has been largest among 
Dutch victims.

– For almost a third of the victims reported to CoMensha since 2007, it is not known whether they 
had already been exploited or, if they had been exploited, in which sector. For at least one-tenth of 
the victims, it is at least known that they had not worked, and for at least half of them, it has been 
established that they were exploited in the sex industry. In the period 2007-2009, at least 161 reported 
victims were exploited in a sector other than the sex industry, of whom 57 (35%) in agriculture and 



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
112

horticulture. Once again, this was due to the possible situation of exploitation discovered at the 
asparagus farm in Someren in 2009.

– Victims are reported to CoMensha most frequently by the police (55% of all notifications in the last 
decade). In second place are networks for victims of human trafficking (with 11%), followed by shel-
ters (with 5%).

 In 2009, three-quarters of the 201 notifications of victims requiring shelter came from the police. 
But they were also reported by the networks for victims of human trafficking (11%) and the Royal 
Netherlands Marechaussee (9%).

Victims and the B9 regulation
In the period 2000-2009 (with the exception of 2003 and 2004), 1173 B9 residence permits were granted 
to victims. The annual number of B9 awards has multiplied more than five-fold in the last decade (from 
55 to 280).
– In the period 2006-2008, a larger proportion of B9 permits were granted to male victims than in the 

preceding years (10% to 11% compared with 2% to 3%) as a result of the criminalisation of exploita-
tion in sectors other than the sex industry. Male victims actually accounted for 19% of B9 awards in 
2009.

– On average, 53% of those granted B9 status are aged between 18 and 25 and almost 10% are minors. 
There has been a slight shift to older age groups over the years.

– The top 5 nationalities of recipients of B9 status in the last decade have been Nigerian in first place, 
followed at some distance by Bulgarian, Chinese, Sierra Leonean and Romanian.

 Over the years, the number of recipients of B9 status from Europe has steadily declined and the 
number from Africa and Asia has steadily risen.

– A significant share (22%) of successful B9 applications came from the Haaglanden and Amsterdam-
Amstelland police regions.

Victims and compensation
There were a total of 96 final and irrevocable judgments in the period 2000-2009 in which compensa-
tion orders were made on behalf of 140 victims (85% of them in the period since 2004). In most cases 
(69%) the compensation was not more than €5000 per case (not per victim). In 44% of the 96 cases the 
compensation has been paid in full, 42% of the cases are still open and 11% have been disposed of with 
an alternative custodial sentence.

3.4	 Suspects	and	offenders
This section contains data about persons suspected of human trafficking and persons who have been 
convicted of the offence in the Netherlands. In other words, suspects of human trafficking registered by 
the public prosecution service (PPS)122 and persons convicted of human trafficking in first instance or 
on appeal.123. The content of this section is based on:

122 In other words, the known suspects in the Netherlands who have been prosecuted (following an inves-
tigation by the police) for at least human trafficking. For the reader’s convenience, in the remainder of 
this section the term ‘suspects’ will be used. 

123 In other words, the known offenders in the Netherlands who have been convicted in first instance or 
on appeal (following an investigation by the police and a prosecution by the PPS) for at least human 



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
113

– information from the PPS in § 3.4.1 (on the prosecution of the suspects and convicted offenders), 
§ 3.4.2 (on the trial in first instance of the suspects and convicted offenders) and in § 3.4.3 (on the 
background characteristics of the suspects and the offenders convicted in first instance);

– information from the Research and Policy Database for Judicial Documentation (OBJD) in § 3.4.2 (on 
the trial on appeal of the suspects and convicted offenders).

Research method
The information in the following subsections (§§ 3.4.1, 3.4.2 and 3.4.3) is based largely on the database 
of the PPS (PPS database), a national database containing information from its district offices and the 
district courts about the prosecution and trial in first instance of suspects and offenders. From the 
complete database, the cases in which at least the offence of human trafficking (Article 250a, 250ter, 
273a or 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code) was registered can be selected. The secondary analyses of the 
sub-database for ‘human trafficking’ were performed by the Statistical Information and Policy Analysis 
(SIBA) department of the Ministry of Justice’s Research and Documentation Centre (WODC) at BNRM’s 
request.
The same applies for the information from the OBJD (§ 3.4.2). The OBJD is a database created for the 
purposes of academic research and to assist in the formulation and monitoring of policy. The database is 
regularly supplied with information from the Judicial Documentation System (JDS). For the explanatory 
notes to the figures and tables in this section, the additional tables in Appendix 3 and the applicable 
statistics, see Appendix 2.

Remarks about the figures
The data from the sub-database for ‘human trafficking’ that are presented in this section may not cover 
all suspects registered by the PPS and offenders convicted of a human trafficking offence in first instance 
because occasionally, if the indictment contains multiple offences, only the first offence is registered 
in the PPS database.124

Also, the data from the PPS database are not up to date and are therefore often incomplete. The data 
in the OBJD are even more outdated. It is at least six months before the data in the PPS database for a 
particular year can give a fairly reliable impression. The data are reasonably stable after approximately 
a year, although even then some minor changes will still be made at subsequent reference dates.125 The 
most recent reliable data available in January 2010, therefore, were the data for 2008.126 Where possible, 
the data have been supplemented with figures from the PPS’s annual report for 2009.
It also has to be borne in mind that the data do not cover a cohort, since cases are not all dealt with by 
the PPS and by the court of first instance, and where applicable by the court of appeal, in the same year 
as they are registered by the PPS.

trafficking. For the reader’s convenience, in the remainder of this section the term ‘offenders’ will be 
used.

124 In fact, only the principal offences charged are included in the PPS database. However, since it is very 
unlikely that a human trafficking offence will be charged as a subsidiary offence to another offence 
this is not relevant for the registered human trafficking offences. 

125 Every year, therefore, BNRM requests the data from the earlier years on which it has reported in order 
to analyse them again.

126 Information received verbally from WODC.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
114

Finally, it should be noted that the PPS database (and the OBJD) makes no distinction between human 
trafficking offences involving sexual exploitation and human trafficking offences involving other forms 
of exploitation. COMPAS, the current registration system used to supply data for the PPS database will 
shortly be entirely replaced by the new GPS system. The Rapporteur has requested (and in the Fifth and 
Seventh Reports recommended127) that this distinction be made in the new system.

3.4.1 Prosecution

Number of human trafficking cases registered by the PPS
Figure 3.20 shows the trend in the number of human trafficking cases against individual suspects regis-
tered annually by the PPS in the period 2000-2009.128

Figure 3.20 Number of cases registered by the PPS (2000-2009)

The number of cases registered by the PPS in the period covered (2000-2009) was 1815. The number of 
cases registered annually remained fairly stable during this ten-year period (from 139 in 2000 to 136 in 
2009). The figure shows a heavily fluctuating pattern, with a decline in one year alternating with an in-
crease in the next. The number of cases only increased over successive years in 2006 and 2007, producing 
the record number of 281 registered cases in 2007. The number of cases fell in 2008, and continued to 
decline in 2009 to around the level in 2005, according to the PPS’s 2009 annual report.129

127 NRM5, recommendation 64; NRM7, recommendation 43.
128 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the 

relative growth in relation to the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.22.
129 According to the PPS, there were 136 registered human trafficking cases (Public Prosecution Service, 

Annual Report 2009). The numbers for ‘Inflow PPS’ for 2005-2008 presented in the annual report dif-
fer slightly from the numbers in Figure 3.20 (and the accompanying Table B3.22 in Appendix 3). This is 
probably the result of the use of different reference dates.

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

Year

A
an

ta
l

Number of human 
tra�cking cases 
registered by the PPS



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
115

Registered cases involving underage victims
Figure 3.21 shows the percentage, in each year and for the period 2000-2008, of all the human traf-
ficking cases registered in a year in which (as far as is known) one or more130 underage victims were 
involved.131,132

Figure 3.21 Registered cases involving underage victims (2000-2008)

An average of 18% of the registered cases involved at least one underage victim in the period 2000-2008. 
The figure fluctuated over the nine years, being at least 20% in 2000, 2001, 2003, 2005 and 2007 (with a 
record of 27% in 2000) and between 12% and 15% in the other four years.

Registered cases, by court district
Figure 3.22 shows the percentage of cases registered by each of the district offices of the PPS during the 
entire period 2000-2008.133

130 The number of human trafficking cases involving underage victims is not indicative of the total number 
of underage victims involved, since there could have been more than one victim in each case. 

131  Criterion: registration under article and section numbers that imply that the victims were underaged. 
In the Dutch Criminal Code, those are section 1 (3) and section 2 (2) of Article 250ter; section 1 (3) 
and (5) and section 2 (2) of Article 250a; and section 1 (2), (5) and (8), section 3 (2) and section 4 of 
Article 273 a/f. However, underage victims could also be involved in cases registered under other 
sections and subsections of those articles (see NRM7 § 11.5.2), so the number is almost certainly 
underestimated. 

132 For the table with the detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.23. 
133 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including the breakdown of the 

figures for the other eight district offices, the top 5 each year and the top 10 overall), see Appendix 3, 
Table B3.24.

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
0%

5%

10%

15%

20%

25%

30%

Year

Human tra�cking 
cases registered 
by the PPS with 
underage victims



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
116

Figure 3.22 Registered cases, by court district (total from 2000-2008)

The district office in Amsterdam registered the largest number of human trafficking cases in the nine-
year period (N=197), closely followed by The Hague with 194 cases. The other offices in the top 5 were 
Rotterdam (N=145), Den Bosch (143) and Zwolle (139). The offices in Assen, Middelburg and Dordrecht 
registered the smallest number of cases between 2000 and 2008 (each accounting for just 1%) and they, 
like Maastricht and Zutphen, did not appear in the top 5 in any of the nine years.134 The office in Utrecht 
appeared in the top 5 for the first time in 2008.
Each office’s share of the total number of cases fluctuated over the years.135 In this context, there was 
a noteworthy trend in the Rotterdam office. Whereas that office was never in the top five in the period 
2000-2004 (with a maximum of 6% in 2000), from 2005 it was in the top five every year (between 10% and 
16%) and in first place twice (2005 and 2006). This trend is probably connected with the establishment of 
the Rotterdam prostitution/human trafficking team in May 2005. Naturally, it goes without saying that 
the number of registered cases is not determined exclusively by the efforts of the office in a particular 
district.136

Nature of the registered cases
Figure 3.23 gives a breakdown of the human trafficking cases registered by the PPS according to the dif-
ferent sections of the human trafficking provision in the Dutch Criminal Code, by year, over the period 
2000-2008.137

The majority of the registered human trafficking cases (71%) over the entire period (2000-2009) involved 
aggravated human trafficking (Articles 250ter/a (2), 273a/f (3), (4) and (5)). Most of those cases involved 
human trafficking committed in concert or human trafficking involving a victim below the age of 16 
(Articles 250ter/a (2) and 273a/f (3)). There were very few cases involving both of these aggravating cir-

134 This also means that some district courts have very little experience with human trafficking cases. 
135 See Appendix 3, Table 3.24.
136  The differences in the number of cases in each district office are undoubtedly connected with dif-

ferences in the size of the districts. However, there are other possible explanations: the differences 
could be connected with the efforts and the management structure in the area of investigation and 
prosecution or with the number of cases of human trafficking that actually occur in a district, perhaps 
also in connection with the geographic and demographic features of the district. However, there is no 
reliable information about this so that it is only possible to speculate about the real reason.

137 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.25.

12%

12%

9%

9%

8%6%
6%

6%

5%

5%

5%

17%

The Hague

Roerdam

Amsterdam

Den Bosch

Zwolle

Arnhem

Utrecht

Almelo

Groningen

Leeuwarden

Haarlem

Other court districts (8)



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
117

cumstances (Article 273a/f (4)) or human trafficking leading to serious physical injury (Article 273a/f (5)): 
only twelve and seven cases, respectively, during the nine-year period. There were no registered cases of 
human trafficking leading to another person’s death (Article 273a/f (6)) in the period 2000-2008.

Figure 3.23 Nature of the registered cases (2000-2008)

The proportion of cases involving aggravated human trafficking has declined significantly over time. 
Whereas in 2000 almost all registered cases involved aggravated human trafficking (97%), in 2008 the 
percentage was only just over half (53%) of all cases (in the period 2001-2004, 73% to 80%; and in the 
period 2005-2007, 66% to 68%). The reason for this trend is not entirely clear.138

Registered cases by most serious offence
Human trafficking is often committed in combination with other offences, so a case can involve mul-
tiple offences. Figure 3.24 presents an overview of the most serious offence charged in each registered 
human trafficking case.139 The ‘most serious offence’ is the offence that carries the heaviest maximum 
sentence.140. The term does not imply a qualitative judgment of the offence.

Human trafficking was the only offence or the most serious registered offence in more than 80% of the 
cases in the period 2000-2008 (aggravated in 61% of the cases and non-aggravated in 22%). The percen-
tage of cases in which aggravated human trafficking is the most serious offence has declined over time 
(from 86% in 2000 to 44% in 2008), while non-aggravated human trafficking has been the most serious 
offence in a growing proportion of cases (2% in 2000 to 39% in 2008). In cases where there were charges 
for another, more serious, offence in addition to human trafficking, that offence was usually a form of 
sexual violence (11% of the total in the nine-year period). Sexual violence was the most serious charge in 

138 It would be interesting to investigate what the ratio (between non-aggravated human trafficking and 
aggravated human trafficking) is for cases in which a summons was issued. Those figures are not avai-
lable, however.

139 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.26.
140 In the event of a combination of offences with the same maximum sentence, human trafficking is 

deemed the most serious offence. If there are then still multiple offences with the same maximum 
sentence, the offence committed first prevails.

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Year

273a/f section 4

273a/f section 3

273a/f section 5

250ter/a section 2

273a/f section 1

250ter/a section 1



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
118

22 cases (10%) in 2008. Human trafficking may be the most serious registered offence in more cases in 
the future as a result of the raising of the maximum sentences from 1 July 2009 (see § 2.2.4).

Figure 3.24 Registered cases, by most serious offence (2000-2008)

Registered cases and preventive custody
Figure 3.25 shows the percentage of cases registered by the PPS in which the suspects were detained in 
preventive custody at any time for the period 2000-2008.141 It is important to note that this does not 
mean that a suspect was still in preventive custody at the time of the trial.142

Figure 3.25 Registered cases and preventive custody (2000-2008)

On average, suspects were held in preventive custody in 78% of all cases. This proportion did not change 
much from year to year (the range is small, from a minimum of 72% to a maximum of 84%). Although 
the suspects were all charged at least with the serious offence of human trafficking, almost a quarter 
were not held in preventive custody. Since preventive custody is sometimes suspended or lifted, an even 

141  For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.27.
142 Preventive custody may be suspended or lifted in the meantime. These data therefore do not give 

any indication of the proportion of suspects who were still in preventive custody at the time of the 
judgment.

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Year

Other oences

Other violence

Sexual violence

Non-aggravated 
human tracking

Aggravated 
human tracking

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Not in pre-trial 
custody 

In pre-trial custody



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
119

greater proportion will not have been in preventive custody at the time of the trial.143 The possibilities 
for applying preventive custody have increased since the maximum sentences for human trafficking 
offences were raised from 1 July 2009.

Number of human trafficking cases dealt with by the PPS
Figure 3.26 shows the trend in the number of cases dealt with by the PPS in the ten-year period.144 The 
number of cases registered and the number of cases dealt with in any one year do not cover a cohort,145 
so the numbers cannot be compared with each other.

Figure 3.26 Number of cases dealt with by the PPS (2000-2009)

The PPS dealt with a total of 1834 human trafficking cases in the period 2000-2009. The number of cases 
dealt with annually more than doubled over that period (from 93 in 2000 to 204 in 2009). The number 
rose almost every year, although the size of the increase compared with the preceding year ranged from 
just 3% in 2002 to an enormous jump of 53% in 2008, which produced the record number of 281 cases 
being dealt with in that year. The number of cases dealt with fell for the first time in 2005 (by -46% 
compared with the preceding year) and then again in 2007, although less dramatically (-7%). According 
to the PPS’s annual report, the number of cases dealt with declined again in 2009 to roughly the level 
of 2006.146

Cases dealt with by the PPS, by disposition of the case
Figure 3.27 shows the disposition of cases by the PPS in the period 2000-2008.147 ‘Transfer of jurisdiction’ 
refers to the transfer of a case to another district in the Netherlands or to another country.

143 BNRM proposes conducting research in the future into the system of preventive custody.
144 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the 

relative growth in relation to the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.28. 
145 See under ‘Remarks about the figures’ earlier in this section.
146 According to the PPS, 204 human trafficking cases were dealt with in 2009 (Public Prosecution Service, 

Annual Report 2009). The numbers for ‘Outflow PPS’ for 2005-2008 presented in the annual report dif-
fer slightly from the numbers in Figure 3.26 (and the accompanying Table B3.28 in Appendix 3). This is 
probably due to the use of different reference dates.

147 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.29. 

0 

50 

100 

150 

200 

250 

300 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

N
um

be
r

Year

Number of 
human tra�cking 
cases dealt with 
by the PPS



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
120

Figure 3.27 Cases dealt with by the PPS, by disposition (2000-2008)

The most common method of disposition of a case was issuing a summons (in 75% of the cases over 
the nine years). In the majority of cases a summons was issued for offences including human trafficking 
(71%)148 and sometimes only for offences other than human trafficking (4%). After the record of issued 
summons in 2007 (in 82% of the cases), this figure fell again to 72% in 2008. At the same time, the num-
ber of cases involving unconditional decisions not to prosecute rose in 2008 (from 15% in 2007 (the smal-
lest percentage in the nine-year period) to 23% in 2008). This reversed a steady, gradual decline since 2001 
in the proportion of unconditional decisions not to prosecute (with the exception of 2004 when there 
was an increase of 1% compared with 2003). Over the nine-year period, there were 369 unconditional 
decisions not to prosecute. Of these, 71% were taken on technical grounds (in Dutch: technische sepots) and 
20% were on the basis of policy waivers (in Dutch: beleidssepots).149 In 2008, policy waivers accounted for 
24% of decisions not to prosecute, a higher than average proportion and a particularly striking increase 
in relation to the two preceding years (7% in 2006 and 11% in 2007). The other methods of disposition 
were scarcely ever used.150

148 When the figures on summonses for at least human trafficking presented here and in Appendix 3 Table 
B.3.29 are compared with the figures for ‘Of which, summons’ for 2005-2008 in the PPS’s annual report 
for 2009, the data do not correspond. This is probably mainly the result of the use of different selection 
criteria. For example, the PPS’s selection was probably based on registered human trafficking cases that 
led to a summons (even if charges were only brought for offences other than human trafficking), while 
the WODC (SIBA department) based its selection, at BNRM’s request, on registered human trafficking 
cases that led to a summons that at least included human trafficking.

149 In 9% of the involving an unconditional decision not to prosecute, the grounds for the decision were 
not registered and are therefore unknown.

150 It should be noted with respect to ‘joinder’ as a method of disposition that the PPS’ data do not show 
whether a joinder was ‘ad informandum’ or ‘for trial’. Joinder for trial means that a summons is issued for 
the offences in one case in the same indictment as the offences in another case (with a different cause-
list number). A joinder for trial therefore represents the disposition of a case by summons. Where a 
case is joined ad informandum, no charges are brought but the case is joined with another case so that 
the judge can also take the joined case into account in determining the sentence. The judge can only 
take the joined case into account if the suspect admits the offence. 

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Conditional decision 
not to prosecute

Joinder

Out-of-court se�lement

Transfer of jurisdiction 

Unconditional decision 
not to prosecute

Summons only
for other o­ences

Summons for o­ences 
including human tracking



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
121

3.4.2 Trial

Number of human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance
Figure 3.28 shows the trend in the number of cases dealt with in first instance in the period 2000-2008.151

Figure 3.28 Number of cases dealt with in first instance (2000-2008)  

The number of human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance each year almost doubled in the nine 
years (from 84 in 2000 to 152 in 2008). In the first four years of the period covered, the number of cases 
increased every year (and at a steadily faster rate) before peaking in 2004. The number of cases dealt with 
then declined in 2005 and 2006 before rising again in the last two years shown. The steepest increase 
(32%) in the nine-year period occurred in 2008, producing a record number of 152 cases dealt with (one 
more than in 2004).

Cases dealt with in first instance, by disposition
Figure 3.29 shows the decisions made by the court of first instance in the cases dealt with in the period 
2000-2008.152

On average, 68% of the human trafficking cases dealt with in first instance ended in a conviction for at 
least human trafficking.153 In 28% of the cases, the defendants were acquitted of human trafficking (17% 
ended in a conviction only for offences other than human trafficking and 11% in a complete acquittal).

151 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the 
relative growth compared with the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.30. 

152 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.31. 
153 Note, however, that even within this 68% there might have been acquittals on charges of human traf-

ficking, since if one charge of human trafficking is declared proven, there is a conviction for at least 
human trafficking. At the same time, it is then possible that the suspect was acquitted on the other 
charges of human trafficking.

0 

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

120 

140 

160 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

N
um

be
r

Year

Number of custodial 
sentences imposed

Number of 
convictions for 
human tra�cking

Number of human 
tra�cking cases
dealt with in 
rst instance



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
122

Figure 3.29 Cases dealt with in first instance, by disposition (2000-2008)

Broadly speaking, there has generally been a decline in the proportion of convictions for human traf-
ficking during the period covered. Whereas in 2000 and 2001 there were convictions in 73% and 79% of 
the cases, respectively, the figure was only 63% in 2007 and just 51% in 2008.154 At the same time, there 
has been a steady increase in the proportion of cases in which there was no conviction for human traffic-
king (convictions only for offences other than human trafficking and complete acquittals) since 2004.155 
Other judicial decisions have been rendered only sporadically (together representing 3% of the total).
Appendix 3, Table B3.32 presents a breakdown of the disposition of the cases in first instance according 
to the most serious offence charged.156

Figure 3.28 shows that the trend in the number of convictions for at least human trafficking up to and 
including 2006 was roughly the same as the trend in the number of human trafficking cases dealt with in 
first instance. In 2007 and 2008, however, the number of convictions for at least human trafficking rose 
far more slowly (in absolute terms) than the number of cases dealt with. This corresponds with Figure 
3.29, which shows that the number of convictions for at least human trafficking declined (in relative 
terms) in relation to the total number of cases dealt with in first instance in 2007 and 2008. A partial 
explanation for this might be that since the end of 2006 there have also been prosecutions for exploita-
tion outside the sex industry (‘other forms of exploitation’), cases which often involved relatively large 
numbers of suspects – see § 3.2.2).157 The case-law on these forms of exploitation is still evolving. Until 
the end of 2009, these cases ended relatively frequently in acquittals (see § 2.8.5).

154 When the figures on convictions for at least human trafficking here and in Appendix 3, Table B.3.31 are 
compared with the figures for ‘Convictions’ for 2005-2008 in the PPS’s annual report for 2009, the data 
do not correspond. This is probably mainly due to the use of different selection criteria. For example, 
the PPS’s selection was probably based on registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons 
(even if charges were only brought for offences other than human trafficking) and then led to a convic-
tion (even if there was only a conviction for offences other than human trafficking), while the WODC 
(SIBA department) based its selection, at BNRM’s request, on registered human trafficking cases that led 
to a summons for at least human trafficking and then led to a conviction for at least human trafficking.

155 2004: 21% (14% + 7%) and 2008: 45% (23% + 22%).
156 For the interpretation of this table, see the explanation in the footnote to Table B.3.32 in Appendix 3.
157 Unfortunately, the text of Article 273a/f makes it impossible to give an impression (on the grounds 

of sections and subsections) of the nature of the exploitation (in the sex industry, in other economic 
sectors or in relation to the removal of organs).

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Prosecution declared inadmissible

Discharge from further prosecution

Other decisions

Cases joined at trial

Acqui al

Conviction only for other oences

Conviction for oences 
including human tracking



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
123

Nature of the convictions in first instance
Figure 3.30 presents a breakdown of the convictions for human trafficking in first instance by convicti-
ons for non-aggravated and for aggravated158 human trafficking, by year, over the period 2000-2008.159

Figure 3.30 Nature of the convictions in first instance (2000-2008)

On average, in 78% of the cases in which there were convictions for at least human trafficking, aggravated 
human trafficking was declared proven. With convictions for aggravated human trafficking in 100% of 
the cases in 2000 and only in 65% of the cases in 2008, the figure shows a downward trend. The percen-
tage of convictions for aggravated human trafficking has, however, also risen in some years during the 
nine-year period (in 2004, 2006 and 2007). The trend shown here corresponds with the decline in the 
proportion of cases involving aggravated human trafficking among the cases registered by the PPS (see 
figure 3.23). A reservation has to be made here. From the survey of the case-law on sexual exploitation 
in 2007, for example, it emerged that no indictment ever included the aggravating circumstance of the 
involvement of a victim below the age of 16, although it was clear from eleven of the judgments that 
there was a victim younger than 16 involved.160

Convictions in first instance, by sentence imposed
Figure 3.31 provides an overview of the punishments that were imposed in the cases in which there was 
a conviction for at least human trafficking between 2000 and 2008.161

Custodial sentences were imposed, on average, in 88% of the cases in which there was a conviction for 
at least human trafficking. Community service was the principal sentence in 8% of the cases.
Custodial sentences accounted for between 81% and 85% of all sentences between 2000 and 2003 and 
between 89% and 95% in the period 2004-2008. Although the proportion of convictions for human 
trafficking declined over the nine years, the relative frequency with which custodial sentences were 
imposed increased.

158 In other words, where there were aggravating circumstances. 
159 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.33.
160 See NRM7, p. 435.
161 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including a breakdown into non-

aggravated and aggravated human trafficking), see Appendix 3, Table 3.34.

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Conviction for non-aggravated 
human tra�cking

Conviction for aggravated 
human tra�cking



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
124

Figure 3.31 Convictions, by sentence imposed (2000-2008)

Figure 3.28 shows the same trend in the number of custodial sentences imposed for convictions for at 
least human trafficking as in the number of convictions for human trafficking in the period 2000-2008. 
This figure also shows a steady convergence (in absolute terms) of the number of custodial sentences 
imposed and the number of convictions for human trafficking. This corresponds with Figure 3.31, in 
which it can be seen that during the nine-year period the proportion of custodial sentences increased 
to more than 90% in relation to the total number of convictions (in relative terms).

Custodial sentences imposed in first instance, by length of sentence
Figure 3.32 provides an overview of the length of the custodial sentences imposed in cases in which 
defendants were convicted of at least human trafficking between 2000 and 2008.162

Figure 3.32 Custodial sentences, by length of sentence (2000-2008)

On average, 37% of custodial sentences imposed in first instance for at least human trafficking were for 
a term of up to one year. More than half (53%) of the custodial sentences were for between one and four 
years, and only 11% were for more than four years.

162 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including a breakdown by aggravated 
and non-aggravated human trafficking), see Appendix 3, Table B3.35.

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

No principal sentence

Only conditional sentence

Fine

Community service

Custodial sentence

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

More than 4 years

1 to 4 years

Up to 1 year



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
125

The figure implies163 a trend towards shorter custodial sentences in the period 2000-2008. Whereas in 
2000 only 15% of the custodial sentences were for a term of up to one year, that applied for 42% of the 
sentences in 2008. Custodial sentences of more than four years have become steadily less common in 
relative terms (from 15% in 2000 to 3% in 2008), a trend that is at odds with the current perception of 
the seriousness of the offence of human trafficking (which led to the raising of the statutory maximum 
sentences in 2009).

Cases dealt with in first instance in which appeals were filed
Figure 3.33 shows the annual trend in the percentage of all cases dealt with in first instance in which an 
appeal was filed over the period 2000-2008. It also shows which party filed the appeal.164

Figure 3.33 Cases dealt with in first instance in which an appeal was filed (2000-2008)

Appeals were filed in 438 (43%) of the 1013 cases dealt with in first instance in the period 2000-2008. The 
appeal was usually filed by the suspect (25%) or also by the suspect (11%) (total 36%). The proportion of 
cases in which a judgment was appealed fluctuated over the years, ranging from 39% in 2007 to 52% in 
2002. The percentage of cases in which a decision was appealed only by the PPS165 ranged from 1% in 
2001 to 12% in 2002, with an average of 7%.166

163 This is impossible to state with certainty since the length of the custodial sentences is divided into ca-
tegories. For example, it is possible that in one year the average length of the custodial sentences that 
fall into the category 1-4 years is slightly longer than one year, while in another year the average length 
of the sentences in this category is almost four years. That does not apply here, however. The average 
custodial sentence imposed each year since 2006 (2006: 612.3, Sd=544.6; 2007: 630.8, Sd=587.5; 2008: 
624.1, Sd=444.8) is shorter than the average custodial sentence imposed over the entire nine years 
(759.7 days, Sd=714.9). Also note that the custodial sentences are imposed for the total of offences that 
are declared proven in one case (so sometimes also for other offences than human trafficking).

164 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.36.
165 The proportion of all cases where the PPS filed an appeal (alone or together with the suspect) ranged 

from 9% in 2004 to 27% in 2002, with an average of 18%.
166 Because the PPS database makes no distinction between human trafficking for the purpose of sexual 

exploitation and human trafficking for the purpose of exploitation in sectors other than the sex indus-
try, it is impossible to ascertain whether the PPS appeals more often in cases involving exploitation in 
sectors other than the sex industry.

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 
Year

By both parties

Only by the suspect

Only by the PPS



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
126

Number of human trafficking cases dealt with on appeal
Figure 3.34 shows the trend in the number of human trafficking cases heard on appeal in the period 
2000-2008.167

Figure 3.34 Number of cases dealt with on appeal (2000-2008)

The first thing to note is that the impression created by the steep drop in the number of appeals in 2008 
is probably unreliable since there is a considerable delay in the registration of appeal cases in the OBJD. 
Consequently, the number of cases in 2008 will probably be higher at a later reference date (see under 
‘Remarks about the figures’ earlier in this section).
In the period covered, at least 232 human trafficking cases were heard on appeal.168 The annual number 
of human trafficking cases dealt with on appeal varied over the nine years (2000-2008) from nine (4%) 
in 2008 to 42 (18%) in 2006. The largest year-on-year increase was 84% in 2005.

As Figure 3.34 shows, only a small number of human trafficking cases are dealt with on appeal each 
year. It has therefore been decided not to present figures for each individual year but for two periods: 
2000-2004 and 2005-2008.169

167 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the 
relative growth compared with the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.37. 

168 Although ‘the inflow’ (the cases in first instance in which an appeal was filed) and ‘the outflow’ (the 
cases dealt with on appeal) do not cover a cohort and therefore cannot be compared, the difference 
between the inflow of 438 cases and the outflow of 232 cases over the entire period 2000-2008 is re-
markable, particularly since ‘the inflow’ has been corrected for the cases in which the appeal was wit-
hdrawn (information received verbally from WODC). This discrepancy might be explained by a backlog 
in the disposition of cases on appeal, or, alternatively, a backlog in the registration of cases in the OBJD 
in comparison with the PPS’s data (see under ‘Remarks about  the figures’ earlier in this section). 

169 Note, however, that these are periods of five years and four years, so while the appeal cases dealt with 
in the two periods can be compared in relative terms, they cannot be properly compared in absolute 
terms. 

0 

5 

10 

15 

20 

25 

30 

35 

40 

45 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Number of cases 
dealt with on appeal



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
127

Cases dealt with on appeal, by disposition
Figure 3.35 shows the decisions of the courts of appeal in the 230170 human trafficking cases dealt with 
in the two relevant periods.171

Figure 3.35 Cases dealt with on appeal, by disposition (2000-2004 and 2005-2008)

On average, the vast majority (90%) of appeals ended in a conviction for at least human trafficking. In the 
other 10% of the cases, there were 19 acquittals and a few cases in which the prosecution was declared 
inadmissible. The proportion of convictions was slightly higher in the period 2005-2008 (by 6%) than 
in the period 2000-2004.
Table B3.39 in Appendix 3 presents a breakdown of the disposition of cases on appeal according to the 
most serious offence charged.172

Convictions on appeal, by sentence imposed
Figure 3.36 shows the sentences that were imposed in the 206 human trafficking cases in which there 
were convictions for at least human trafficking on appeal in the two defined periods.173

Figure 3.36 Convictions on appeal, by sentence imposed (2000-2004 and 2005-2008)

170 There were actually 232 appeal cases dealt with (see Appendix 3, Table B3.37). However, two judgments 
are missing and therefore no further details about them are available to report. 

171 For the table with s detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.38. 
172 For the interpretation of this table, see the explanation in the footnote to Table 3.39 in Appendix 3.
173 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.40. 

8002-50024002-0002
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

Period

Acqui�al

Prosecution declared 
inadmissible

Conviction

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

90%

100%

2000-2004 2005-2008 

Period 

Community service

Only conditional 
sentence

Fine

Unconditional 
custodial sentence



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
128

Custodial sentences were imposed in 92% of the cases in which there was a conviction for at least human 
trafficking in the period 2000-2008. In 5% of the cases, the principal punishment was a community 
service order.
It is interesting to note that all four conditional sentences and the three fines were imposed in the period 
2005-2008. However, these were incidental cases and one should not attach too much significance to 
them.

Custodial sentences imposed on appeal, by length of sentence
Figure 3.37 shows the length of the custodial sentences imposed in the 189 human trafficking cases in 
which a custodial sentence was imposed on appeal for at least human trafficking.174

Figure 3.37 Custodial sentences imposed on appeal, by length of sentence (2000-2004 and 2005-2008)

On average, a third (33%) of the custodial sentences imposed on appeal in cases in which there was a 
conviction for at least human trafficking were for a term of up to one year. Almost half (48%) of the 
sentences were for terms of imprisonment of between one and four years and roughly a fifth (19%) were 
for a period of more than four years.
When the periods 2000-2004 and 2005-2008 are compared there is, as in the case of sentences in first 
instance, an evident trend towards shorter custodial sentences.175 In 2008, 46% of the custodial sentences 
were for terms of up to one year, compared with 22% in the period 2000-2004. At the same time, the 
severest custodial sentences (of more than four years) were imposed slightly less often (22% in 2000-2004 
and 16% in 2005-2008).

174 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.41.
175 This is impossible to state with certainty since the length of the custodial sentences is divided into 

categories. For example, it is possible that the average length of the custodial sentences in the category 
1-4 years in one year is slightly longer than one year, while the average length of the sentences in this 
category is almost four years in another year. The average duration of the imposed custodial sentences 
on appeal are not available. Also note that the custodial sentences are imposed for the total of offences 
that are declared proven in one case (so sometimes also for other offences than human trafficking).

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000-2004 2005-2008 

Period

1 to 4 years

Up to 1 year

More than 4 years



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
129

3.4.3 Characteristics

Number of suspects and offenders
Naturally, the trend in the number of suspected human traffickers registered by the PPS each year in the 
period 2000-2009 is the same as the trend in the number of human trafficking cases against individual 
suspects registered annually by the PPS in the same period. The graph line in Figure 3.38 is therefore 
the same as in Figure 3.20.176 Figure 3.39 shows the trend in the number of offenders convicted in first 
instance annually over the period 2000-2008.177

Figure 3.38 Number of suspects registered by the PPS (2000-2009)

The number of suspects registered annually by the PPS has fluctuated sharply (between 130 in 2001 and 
281 in 2007), but has remained roughly stable over the period as a whole (from139 in 2000 to 136 in 2009). 
After peaking in 2007, the number declined in 2008, and that decline continued in 2009, according to 
the PPS’s annual report.178

Figure 3.39 Number of offenders convicted in first instance (2000-2008)

176 For the table with the complete and detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the 
relative growth compared with the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table 3.22.

177 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including index figures and the 
relative growth compared with the preceding year), see Appendix 3, Table B3.42.

178 According to the PPS, there were 136 registered suspects of human trafficking in 2009 (Public Prosecu-
tion Service, Annual Report 2009). The numbers for ‘Inflow PPS’ for 2005-2008 presented in the PPS’s 
annual report differ slightly from the number in Figure 3.38 (and the accompanying Table B3.22 in 
Appendix 3). This is probably the result of the use of different reference dates.

0 

50 

100 

150 

200 

250 

300 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

N
um

be
r

Year

Number of suspects 
registered by the PPS

0 

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

120 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

N
um

be
r

Year

Number of o�enders 
convicted in �rst instance



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
130

The figure showing the trend in the number of persons convicted in first instance each year displays a 
totally different pattern. The number of convicted offenders increased slightly from 61 to 77 in the period 
2000-2008. The overall range is not very wide (between 61 and 82), with the exception of 2004 when 
there was a relative increase of 44% compared with 2003, yielding a peak of 114 convicted persons. In 
2007 and 2008, there was a gradual increase in absolute terms, although in relative terms the opposite 
was true (see Figure 3.29).179

Gender of suspects and offenders
Figure 3.40 shows the distribution by gender of the suspects who were registered by the PPS in the period 
2000-2008. Figure 3.41 shows the same distribution for offenders who were convicted in first instance.180

Figure 3.40 Gender of suspects (2000-2008)

The large majority of the suspects over the nine-year period were male (80%). The proportion of female 
suspects declined gradually (with slight fluctuations) over this period (from 27% in 2000 to 15% in 2008). 
The 32 female suspects in 2008 came from Hungary (six), the Netherlands (four), China (three), Bulga-
ria (two), Nigeria (two) and Australia, Belgium, Brazil, the Philippines, India, Morocco, Mongolia, the 
Netherlands Antilles, Poland, Romania, Sierra Leone, the former Soviet Union, Thailand, the former 
Czechoslovakia and Vietnam (one each).

There was a similar trend among convicted offenders. The vast majority were male (82% in the period 
2000-2008) and the proportion of female offenders gradually declined (with fluctuations) over the years, 
from 23% in 2000 to 10% in 2008. The eight women in 2008 came from the Netherlands (three), Hungary 
(two) and the Netherlands Antilles, Romania and the former Soviet Union (one each).

179 When the figures on convicted persons presented here are compared with the figures for ‘Convictions’ 
for 2005-2008 in the PPS’s annual report for 2009, the data do not correspond. This is probably mainly 
the result of the use of different selection criteria. For example, the PPS probably made its selection 
on the basis of registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons (even if charges were only 
brought for offences other than human trafficking) and then led to a conviction (even if there was only 
a conviction for offences other than human trafficking) , while the WODC (SIBA department) made its 
selection, at BNRM’s request, on registered human trafficking cases that led to a summons for at least 
human trafficking and then led to a conviction for at least human trafficking.

180 For the tables with the detailed overviews of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.43 and Table B3.44. 

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Unknown
N.a. (legal entity)
Male suspects
Female suspects



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
131

Figure 3.41 Gender of convicted offenders (2000-2008)

Age of suspects and convicted offenders
Figure 3.42 shows the age distribution of the suspects registered by the PPS in the period 2000-2008. Fi-
gure 3.43 shows the same distribution for offenders convicted in first instance.181 It refers to the age at the 
time of the first human trafficking offence according to the indictment, or, in the case of the convicted 
offenders, the first human trafficking offence for which the offender was convicted.

Figure 3.42 Age of suspects (2000-2008)

On average, more than half of the suspects were younger than 31. The 18-25 age group is the largest in 
every year (between 28% and 42%), with the exception of 2001 and 2003, when the 31-40 age group was 
most heavily represented (39% and 38%, respectively). The proportion of underage suspects ranged from 
2% in 2002, 2004 and 2007 to 6% in 2000 and 2008.
The average age of the suspects182 over the nine-year period was 31.5, fluctuating between 30.1 in 2005 
and 33.2 in 2001 (the average age in 2008 was 31.8). The average age was 31.7 for male suspects183 and 
30.4 for female suspects.184

181 For the tables with a detailed overviews of these data, see Appendix 3, Tables B3.45 and B3.46. 
182 For the table with a detailed overviews of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.47. 
183 Sd=11.22.
184 Sd=11.91.

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Unknown

Male o
enders

Female o
enders

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Unknown
N.a. (legal entity)
51+ 
41-50 
31-40 
26-30 
18-25 
Younger than 18



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
132

Figure 3.43 Age of convicted offenders (2000-2008)

The majority of convicted offenders were also younger than 31.185 The 18-25 age group is usually the 
most heavily represented, although it was an older age group in 2001, 2003 and 2004. The proportion of 
underage convicted offenders ranged from 0% in 2003 to 10% in 2000 (with 6% in 2008).
The average age of convicted offenders186 was 30.3 in the period 2000-2008. After rising erratically 
between 2000 and 2003 (from 26.8 to 33.7 on average), the average age of convicted offenders declined 
every year (with the exception of 2007) to 27.9 in 2008. The average age was 30.4 for male offenders 187 
and 29.8 for female offenders.188

Country of birth of suspects
Table 3.5 shows the ranking of the five most common countries of birth of suspects registered by the 
PPS over the nine-year period.

185 See Appendix 3, Table B3.46.
186 For the table with a detailed overview of these data, see Appendix 3, Table B3.48. 
187 Sd=9.94.
188 Sd=10.11.

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

90% 

100% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Unknown

51+ 
41-50 
31-40 
26-30 
18-25 
Younger than 18

Table 3.5 Ranking of top 5 countries of birth of suspects (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2000-2008

Netherlands 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

Turkey 4’ 4 3’ 4 2 3 2 2 5 2

Bulgaria 3 2 3 4 4’ 3 3’ 3

Romania 5 2 3 4’ 3 5 4

Morocco 2’ 5’ 2 4’ 3’ 5

Hungary 4’ 2

Nigeria 2’ 4

Surinam 5’ 4’

(former)	Soviet	Union 5 5

Albania 3’

(former)	Yugoslavia 4’ 2

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
133

The Netherlands ranks first among the countries of birth of suspects every year. Apart from the Nether-
lands, Turkey is the only other country to appear in the top 5 every year, including three times in second 
place. In 2008, however, Turkey occupied fifth place for the first time. Hungary returned to the annual 
top 5 in 2008 (after previously sharing fourth place in 2005), while in that year (for the first time since 
2002) Romania no longer appeared in the top 5.
The suspects registered by the PPS in the period 2000-2008 were born in a total of 70 different countries 
(excluding the categories: ‘n.a.’ and ‘unknown’). Figure 3.44 shows the trend in the top 5 countries of 
birth of suspects over the entire nine-year period 2000-2008.189. The top 5 countries of birth overall were 
the Netherlands, Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania and Morocco (see Table 3.5, last column), but they did not 
constitute the top 5 in each individual year (see Table 3.5, columns 2-10).190

Figure 3.44 Trend in the overall top 5 countries of birth of suspects (2000-2008)

The proportion of suspects born in the Netherlands has increased slightly over the nine-year period, 
with fluctuations, from 28% in 2000 to 36% in 2008; on average they represent 33% of all suspects. The 
proportion of suspects whose country of birth was Turkey has ranged from a minimum of 5% in 2008 
to a maximum of 13% in 2002. After peaking in 2001-2003 (between 9% and 14%), Bulgaria accounted 
for between 6% and 8% of the suspects in the period 2006-2008. Since 2006, the proportion of suspects 
born in Romania has steadily declined, reaching 2% in 2008 (the same percentage as in 2000-2001). The 
share of suspects born in Morocco has fluctuated around an average of 5%.

Country of birth of convicted offenders
Table 3.6 shows the annual ranking of the five most common countries of birth of offenders convicted 
in first instance in the period 2000-2008.

189 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including all other countries of birth, 
the top 5 in each year and the top 10 overall), see Appendix 3, Table B3.49.

190 Looking at 2001 in Figure 3.44, for example., the five countries of birth that occupy the top 5 overall ac-
count for 44% of the 130 suspects registered by the PPS in 2001, while the top 5 for just 2001 (consisting 
of the Netherlands (23%), former Yugoslavia (17%), Bulgaria (9%), Turkey (6%) and the former Soviet 
Union (5%) accounts for 60% of the 130 suspects registered by the PPS (see Appendix 3, Table 3.49).

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Morocco

Romania

Bulgaria

Turkey

The Netherlands



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
134

Table 3.6 Ranking of top 5 countries of birth of convicted offenders (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2000-2008

Netherlands 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

Bulgaria 5’ 3 2 4 5 5’ 4’ 2 2

Turkey 4 4’ 3 2 3’ 3 4’ 3

Romania 4’ 2 2 4

Morocco 2’ 5’ 2 4’ 5

Netherlands	Antilles 4’ 3

Hungary 5’ 4’

Surinam 5’ 5’ 3 4’

(former)	Czechoslovakia	 5’ 3’

(former)	Soviet	Union 3 5 5’ 4

Albania 3

(former)	Yugoslavia 2’ 2 2

Nigeria 4 4

Ghana 5

Belgium 5’

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

The top 5 countries of birth of convicted offenders are the same as those for suspects. However, Bulgaria 
rather than Turkey occupies second place. A noteworthy newcomer as an important country of birth of 
offenders since 2007 is the Netherlands Antilles.191 As in the case of suspects, Hungary reappeared in the 
top 5 in 2008.

The offenders convicted in first instance in the period 2000-2008 were born in a total of 47 different 
countries (excluding the category ‘unknown’). Figure 3.45 shows the trend in the top 5 countries of birth 
of offenders over the entire nine-year period 2000-2008.192  The top 5 countries of birth overall were 
the Netherlands, Bulgaria, Turkey, Romania and Morocco (see Table 3.6, last column), but they did not 
constitute the top 5 in each individual year (see Table 3.6, columns 2-10).193

191 It is noteworthy that the Netherlands Antilles did not appear in the top 5 for suspects in nine years. This 
needs to be qualified, however, since in 2007 and 2008 it occupied fourth and third place with only four 
and six offenders, respectively. 

192 For the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data (including all other countries of birth, 
the top 5 in each year and the top 10 overall), see Appendix 3, Table B3.50. 

193 Looking at 2001 in Figure 3.45, for example., the five countries of birth that occupy the top 5 overall 
account for 37% of the 67 offenders convicted in first instance in 2001, while the top 5 for just 2001 
(consisting of the Netherlands (28%), former Yugoslavia (13%), the former Soviet Union (9%), Nigeria 
(7%) and Ghana (6%)) accounts for 63% of the 67 offenders convicted in first instance (see Appendix 3, 
Table 3.50).



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
135

Figure 3.45 Trend in overall top 5 countries of birth of convicted offenders (2000-2008)

In the period 2000-2008, the proportion of offenders born in the Netherlands rose from 31% in 2000 to 
45% in 2008, which represents an average of 33% (the same as with suspects). After fluctuating between 
5% and 6% for three years, the proportion of Bulgarian-born offenders suddenly increased to 9% in 
2008. Turkey was the country of birth of between 6% and 7% of the offenders in 2007 and 2008, which 
was less than in the five previous years. The percentage of Romanian offenders varies greatly each year, 
ranging between 0% and 18%. The number of offenders born in Morocco has fluctuated slightly each 
year (between 3% and 6%), with the exception of 2000 (11%), and in particular 2006, when the country 
accounted for the remarkably large proportion of 19%.

3.4.4 Summary
Table 3.7 (next page) consolidates the key data from the statistics discussed in § 3.4 concerning suspects 
and convicted offenders in a single table. It should be noted that the data come from two different 
sources (PPS and OBJD) and do not usually cover a cohort. The data presented in a particular row can 
be compared.

As has been regularly mentioned, the number of cases registered annually by the PPS cannot be compa-
red with the number of cases dealt with by it (because not all the cases are dealt with in the same year that 
they are registered). But that does not apply to the same extent for the total numbers of cases registered 
and dealt with over the entire period 2000-2008. Accordingly, the totals of 1679 cases registered and 1620 
cases dealt with by the PPS are close. The same applies for the total number of cases in which a sum-
mons was issued and the number dealt with in first instance (1150 compared with 1013). In this context, 
a noteworthy comparison is that between the total number of cases in which an appeal was filed in first 
instance (corrected for the cases in which the appeal was withdrawn194) and the cases dealt with on ap-
peal (438 compared with 232). Possible explanations for the discrepancy are that there is a backlog in the 
disposition of cases on appeal or that the registration in OBJD lags behind the PPS database.

194 Information provided verbally by the WODC.

0% 

10% 

20% 

30% 

40% 

50% 

60% 

70% 

80% 

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 

Year

Morocco

Romania

Turkey

Bulgaria

The Netherlands



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
136

Cases registered by the PPS   
A total of 1815 cases in which there was a suspicion of at least human trafficking were registered by the 
PPS in the period 2000-2009. The number of registered cases fluctuated greatly from one year to another, 
but remained roughly the same over the ten-year period (from 139 in 2000 to 136 in 2009). The following 
information covers the period 2000-2008 and thus a total of 1679 cases.
– The proportion of registered cases involving at least one underage victim varied from one year to 

another (between 12% and 27%) and averaged 18%.
– Of the PPS’s 19 district offices, the offices in Amsterdam, The Hague and Rotterdam registered an 

average of 32% of all human trafficking cases. The Rotterdam office owes its position in the top 3 
mainly to the number of cases it has registered since 2005; the number has increased sharply, pro-
bably as a result of the establishment of the Rotterdam prostitution/human trafficking team in that 
year.

195 According to the PPS’s annual report for 2009, there were 136 registered cases in 2009, which brings 
the total to 1815.

196 According to the PPS’s annual report for 2009, there were 204 cases dealt with in 2009, which brings 
the total to 1834.

197 This is not equal to the sum of the cases dealt with on appeal in the period 2000-2004 and the number 
of cases dealt with on appeal in the period 2005-2008, since two judgments are missing and no infor-
mation is available about them.

Table 3.7 Overview of data on suspects and offenders

Number	of	cases 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Totaal

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Cases	registered	by	PPS	 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679195 100%

Cases	dealt	with	by	PPS
-		with	summons	incl.	human	

trafficking

93
70

100%
75%

159
99

100%
62%

163
111

100%
68%

175
116

100%
66%

246
175

100%
71%

132
93

100%
70%

197
145

100%
74%

184
144

100%
78%

281
197

100%
70%

1630
1150

100%
71%

Cases	dealt	with	in	first	
instance
-		with	conviction	incl.	human	

trafficking
-		with	custodial	sentence	

(after	conviction)
-	appeal	filed

84

61

52
(52)
40

100%

73%

62%
(85%)
48%

85

67

56
(56)
38

100%

79%

66%
(84%)
45%

95

68

56
(56)
49

100%

72%

59%
(82%)
52%

115

79

64
(64)
47

100%

69%

56%
(81%)
41%

151

114

101
(101)

60

100%

75%

67%
(89%)
40%

115

82

76
(76)
55

100%

71%

66%
(93%)
48%

101

70

63
(63)
42

100%

69%

62%
(90%)
42%

115

73

69
(69)
45

100%

63%

60%
(95%)
39%

152

77

72
(72)
62

100%

51%

47%
(94%)
41%

1013196

691

609
(609)
438

100%

68%

60%
(88%)
43%

Cases	dealt	with	on	appeal
-		with	conviction	incl.	human	

trafficking
-		with	custodial	sentence	

(after	conviction)

119 (100%)
103 (87%)

97 (82%)
(97 (94%))

111 (100%)
103 (93%)

92 (83%)
(92 (89%))

232197

206

189
(189)

100%
90%

82%
(92%)



Data collection and statistical trends 2000 – 2009
137

– Most registered cases concern forms of aggravated human trafficking (an average of 71%). However, 
that percentage has declined sharply over the nine years (from 97% to 53%).

– Human trafficking is the only offence or the most serious offence (in terms of the maximum sen-
tence) in most of the registered cases (83%). Among these cases, the proportion of aggravated human 
trafficking cases has declined (from 86% to 44%) over the nine years and the proportion of non-
aggravated human trafficking cases has increased (from 2% to 39%). Sexual violence was registered 
as the most serious offence in 11% of all registered cases.

– In 78% of the registered cases the suspect was detained in preventive custody at some point in time.

Cases dealt with by the PPS
In the period 2000-2009, the PPS dealt with 1834 cases involving a suspicion of at least human traf-
ficking. The number of cases dealt with annually has more than doubled in ten years (from 93 in 2000 
to 204 in 2009). The following information covers the period 2000-2008 and thus a total of 1630 cases.
– 71% (N=1150) of the cases were dealt with by a summons for human trafficking, alone or in combina-

tion with other offences. In 23% of the cases there was an unconditional decision not to prosecute, 
and in a fifth of those cases the decisions were based on policy waivers.

Cases dealt with in first instance
A total of 1013 cases that included charges of at least human trafficking were dealt with in first instance 
in the period 2000-2008. The number of cases dealt with annually has almost doubled in the nine years 
(from 84 in 2000 to 152 in 2008).

Table 3.7 Overview of data on suspects and offenders

Number	of	cases 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Totaal

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Cases	registered	by	PPS	 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679195 100%

Cases	dealt	with	by	PPS
-		with	summons	incl.	human	

trafficking

93
70

100%
75%

159
99

100%
62%

163
111

100%
68%

175
116

100%
66%

246
175

100%
71%

132
93

100%
70%

197
145

100%
74%

184
144

100%
78%

281
197

100%
70%

1630
1150

100%
71%

Cases	dealt	with	in	first	
instance
-		with	conviction	incl.	human	

trafficking
-		with	custodial	sentence	

(after	conviction)
-	appeal	filed

84

61

52
(52)
40

100%

73%

62%
(85%)
48%

85

67

56
(56)
38

100%

79%

66%
(84%)
45%

95

68

56
(56)
49

100%

72%

59%
(82%)
52%

115

79

64
(64)
47

100%

69%

56%
(81%)
41%

151

114

101
(101)

60

100%

75%

67%
(89%)
40%

115

82

76
(76)
55

100%

71%

66%
(93%)
48%

101

70

63
(63)
42

100%

69%

62%
(90%)
42%

115

73

69
(69)
45

100%

63%

60%
(95%)
39%

152

77

72
(72)
62

100%

51%

47%
(94%)
41%

1013196

691

609
(609)
438

100%

68%

60%
(88%)
43%

Cases	dealt	with	on	appeal
-		with	conviction	incl.	human	

trafficking
-		with	custodial	sentence	

(after	conviction)

119 (100%)
103 (87%)

97 (82%)
(97 (94%))

111 (100%)
103 (93%)

92 (83%)
(92 (89%))

232197

206

189
(189)

100%
90%

82%
(92%)



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
138

– On average, 68% (N=691) of the cases dealt with in first instance led to a conviction for at least hu-
man trafficking. The trend over the entire period was as follows: the proportion of convictions for 
at least human trafficking declined sharply (from 73% in 2000 to 51% in 2008), while at the same 
time the percentage of acquittals on charges of human trafficking increased (from 26% in 2000 to 
45% in 2008). A partial explanation for this could be that since the end of 2006 there have also been 
prosecutions for exploitation outside the sex industry ‘other forms of exploitation’ (cases that often 
involve a relatively large number of suspects). The case-law on these forms of exploitation is still 
evolving. Until the end of 2009, these cases relatively frequently ended in acquittals.

– On average, aggravated human trafficking was declared proven in 78% of the cases in which there 
was a conviction for at least human trafficking (compared with 22% of cases in which non-aggravated 
human trafficking was declared proven). Over the entire period, the proportion of cases in which 
aggravated human trafficking was declared proven has declined from 100% in 2000 to 65% in 2008.

– Custodial sentences were imposed in the vast majority of cases in which there were convictions for 
human trafficking (88%). These sentences have been even more common in the period since 2004 
(between 89% and 95%).

– If a custodial sentence was imposed in a case in which there was a conviction for at least human 
trafficking it was mainly for a period of one to four years (53%). Sentences of less than a year were 
imposed in 37% of cases, and sentences of more than four years in just 11%. The custodial sentences 
imposed have become steadily shorter, which contrasts with current perceptions of the seriousness 
of the offence of human trafficking (which led to the increase in the maximum sentences from 1 July 
2009).

– Appeals were filed in 43% of the 1013 cases dealt with in first instance, usually by the suspect alone 
or by the suspect and the PPS.

Cases dealt with on appeal
A total of 232 cases in which the charges included human trafficking were dealt with on appeal in the 
period 2000-2008. In 90% of the cases, there was a conviction for at least human trafficking. The 206 
convictions usually (92%) resulted in a custodial sentence. A third of the custodial sentences were for 
a term of up to one year, and a fifth for a term of more than four years. The other custodial sentences 
were for terms of between one and four years. As in cases dealt with in first instance, there has been an 
apparent trend towards shorter custodial sentences in appeal cases.

Characteristics
On average, 80% of the suspects and 82% of the convicted offenders were male and more than half of 
both suspects and convicted offenders were below the age of 31 (including an average of 4% minors) 
in the period 2000-2008. The top 5 countries of birth of the suspects and convicted offenders were the 
Netherlands, Turkey, Bulgaria, Romania and Morocco, although the order was slightly different in the 
ranking for convicted offenders.



4	 	The	National	Rapporteur	on	Trafficking	
in	Human	Beings	in	the	Netherlands:		
Ten	Years	On

Recommendations
The previous chapters have reviewed developments in efforts in the fight against human trafficking in 
the Netherlands and the results of the work of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 
in the ten years since the position was created in the Netherlands. That review yielded a qualitative and 
quantitative overview of the issues that arose in relation to efforts to combat human trafficking during 
that period and how they have been addressed. As regards the role of the Rapporteur, the focus was on 
the recommendations she has made and the effects they have had. The effectiveness of an independent 
rapporteur depends to a large extent on the degree to which the recommendations produced results. 
Most of the Rapporteur’s recommendations have been closely connected with practical issues. It is easy 
to see the extent to which those recommendations have been adopted and have led to improvements. 
Other recommendations have been of a more fundamental nature and have contributed more to the 
development of a vision. Recommendations incorporate commentary on policies and their implemen-
tation, and have an impact when the comments are understood and subsequently play a role in decision-
making processes. That has generally been the case in the last decade.

For example, the Rapporteur’s recommendations concerning immigration policy have largely been 
translated into improvements in rules and policies. Recommendations concerning the care for victims 
have, slowly but surely, led to care being tailored more closely to the specific needs of victims of human 
trafficking and to serious efforts to eliminate shortages of capacity. In the field of investigation and 
prosecution, professionalism has increased in many areas, although capacity and prioritisation remain 
persistent problems. The recommendations concerning prevention, awareness and identification of 
victims have also produced results.
It is not only the recommendations that have an impact. The Rapporteur also brings about improve-
ments by initiating discussion of subjects and by conducting her own research. The study of case-law 
on exploitation in the sex industry in the seventh report, for example, has led to growing attention to 
the subject in the judiciary.

In view of the priority given to tackling human trafficking in the Netherlands, in her recommendations 
the Rapporteur has repeatedly drawn attention to the need to make sufficient realistic capacity available 
for the relevant organisations. This is a point that still demands attention. Although capacity is not a 
goal in itself, it is always important to enquire whether the policy objectives formulated in this impor-
tant domain can be achieved with the resources available. Naturally, identification, attitude, awareness 
and training also play a prominent role in this context. The recommendations have generated a lot of 
attention for these aspects too in the last ten years.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
140

There have been a number of other recurring themes in the Rapporteur’s interventions. One important 
topic has been to foster the realisation that human trafficking is not confined to exploitation in the sex 
industry, but also occurs in other sectors (summed up as ‘other forms of exploitation’). This was the rea-
son why, even before the office of Rapporteur was created, there were calls for a rapporteur on human traf-
ficking and not just trafficking in women. Since the expansion of the criminalisation of human trafficking 
to ‘other forms of exploitation’, the Rapporteur has repeatedly observed that Dutch legislation makes 
no distinction between exploitation in the sex industry and in other sectors, and that, in principle, the 
seriousness of the exploitation does not depend on the sector in which it occurs.

The Rapporteur has also drawn attention to the importance of a comprehensive policy, one that is not 
confined to arranging care for victims, but also encompasses the investigation and prosecution of of-
fenders, based on the notion that the two approaches are inseparable and can only be effective in com-
bination. By extension, the Rapporteur has also helped to secure recognition of the fact that human 
trafficking is sometimes manifested as a form of organised crime, and should be dealt with appropriately 
when the situation arises.

The Rapporteur has constantly stressed the importance of cooperation and the exchange of information in 
the anti-trafficking chain. This importance has certainly grown in the Netherlands, and has been put into 
practice, but chain cooperation is still fragile. To remain effective, cooperation needs maintenance: a con-
stant effort to maintain the involvement of all the partners in the chain, if necessary by providing direction.

As well as highlighting the fact that aliens without residence status should be treated as possible victims 
if there is even the slightest indication of human trafficking, the Rapporteur has constantly drawn atten-
tion to the fact that human trafficking can also occur solely within national borders and that underage 
domestic victims, in particular, require special care.

A number of recommendations have related to the regulation of the prostitution sector. In 2000, the 
Netherlands adopted an exceptional position (in international terms) on the regulation of the prosti-
tution sector by lifting the ban on brothels and opting for a more regulatory approach to prostitution. 
This approach was based, in part, on the idea that the profession of prostitution could be normalised. 
One of the factors behind this decision was the view that entering the profession was an individual’s free 
choice that should be respected. This may have obscured the sight of forced prostitution, especially since 
establishing a licensing system for the prostitution sector was expected to make licensed prostitution 
more manageable, and hence lead to eradication of abuses in the sector. Over the last decade, the emp-
hasis in attitudes towards the prostitution sector seems to have shifted to the vulnerability of the sector 
to human trafficking. Several notorious cases that have shown that widespread exploitation can also 
take place in the licensed prostitution sector have undoubtedly been a factor in this. The Rapporteur has 
repeatedly pointed out that a comprehensive policy is also required in this area, one in which tackling 
the illegal sector is as important as firm supervision of the licensed sector. In the draft Act to Regulate 
Prostitution and Combat Abuses in the Sex Industry, the Dutch government has proposed a series of 
measures in response to some of the developments and new insights that have emerged since the lifting 
of the ban on brothels. Accordingly, the Netherlands has shown that it is willing to look critically at the 
effects of policies and to revise them if necessary.

To whom does the National Rapporteur address her recommendations? She reports to the government, 
and can make recommendations to all government agencies and non-governmental organizations in-



The National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings in the Netherlands: Ten Years On
141

volved in formulating and implementing policy on human trafficking. Recommendations have been 
directed at the central government as a whole, the legislature, the judiciary, local authorities, the insti-
tutions that provide shelter and help for victims, as well as to executive agencies such as the police, the 
public prosecution service, the Labour Inspectorate, the Social Intelligence and Investigation Service 
and the tax authorities.

More specifically, the recommendations have been addressed to the organisations with coordinating and 
executive duties. Inherent to the independent position of the Rapporteur is the fact that the Rapporteur 
has no coordinating or executive duties. In the Netherlands, those tasks are performed by public officials 
or consortia of the relevant organisations. For example, CoMensha coordinates the placement of victims. 
One of the members of the Council of Police Chiefs has been assigned the human trafficking portfolio, 
as has one of the procurators general. In addition, the public prosecution service has a national public 
prosecutor and eleven regional prosecutors. The police service’s Centre of Expertise for Human Traffic-
king and Migrant Smuggling (EMM) has the task of collecting and analysing strategic and operational 
information, while the police and public prosecution service have formed a number of consultative bo-
dies (LEM, OOM, BOOM) to coordinate their activities and share operational information. The ministries 
of Justice; Foreign Affairs; the Interior and Kingdom Relations; Health, Welfare and Sport (partly from 
the perspective of Youth and Family); and Social Affairs and Employment (as the ministry responsible for 
the SIOD and the Labour Inspectorate) also have coordinating and management tasks. Furthermore, in 
response to a recommendation by the Rapporteur, the Task Force on Human Trafficking (consisting of 
leading members of those key organisations, together with representatives of local authorities) was esta-
blished with the task of identifying bottlenecks, solving problems and promoting innovative initiatives. 
In light of the results that have been achieved, it would be logical to extend the Task Force’s mandate, 
which expires at the beginning of 2011.1 That would present a good opportunity to formalise the position 
of CoMensha, which is not a member of the Task Force but is attending its meetings.

The situation in 2010
Where do efforts to combat human trafficking stand in the Netherlands in 2010? There is a lot of political 
and public attention for the phenomenon of human trafficking. But while the police and the public pro-
secution service have made human trafficking a clear priority, in practice there are persistent problems 
in terms of capacity and giving it the priority it needs.
Partly through the efforts of the Task Force, innovative investigative methods are being used and pro-
gress is being made in promoting the chain philosophy.
The policy towards victims living illegally in the Netherlands has become more balanced, but there are 
still tensions with respect to assumed abuses of the facilities for victims provided under immigration 
law, experienced as a disproportionate burden on the capacity of the police and the public prosecution 
service in cases with little prospect of successful prosecution, and on the other hand the recognition of 
a person’s status as a victim apart from leads for a criminal investigation.
The provision of assistance for victims is also still characterised by a shortage of capacity, although the 
situation has improved as regards initial shelter for victims. There is progress in that area with the pilot 
project to investigate whether category-oriented initial shelter should be created, and if so, what form it 
should take. Providing shelter and care for underage victims is a task of the youth care services, but they 
have not yet formulated an adequate vision of the specific needs of this group.

1 Task Force on Human Trafficking, 2009b.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
142

There is attention for prevention, in the form of campaigns to raise awareness targeted at the general 
public, at clients of prostitutes and for example also at the staff of diplomatic missions abroad, as well 
as in the form of information for schools and the workplace. Preventing individuals from becoming 
victims is at the heart of the policy to combat human trafficking. It is noteworthy in this context that 
the number of Dutch victims declined in 2009, in both absolute and relative terms, for the first time 
since 20032. As far as foreign victims are concerned, the IND should consider compiling a safety file on 
victims it is considering repatriating to their country of origin, partly in order to prevent revictimisation.

The approach to other forms of exploitation is still evolving. Awareness and cooperation in the chain 
with respect to other forms of exploitation have started to grow, particularly in the last few years, alt-
hough these situations of exploitation still seem to be less easily recognised. There is also no vision of 
the facilities needed for victims of other forms of exploitation. With the growing awareness of exploi-
tation outside the sex industry, it will become increasingly common for large groups of victims, often 
male, to be discovered at the same time, which will impose special demands on shelter capacity. It is only 
in the last year that there have been more than incidental convictions for other forms of exploitation. 
The judgment of the Supreme Court on 27 October 2009 in a case of exploitation in a Chinese restaurant 
provides important guidelines for trying cases of other forms of exploitation.3 The interpretation of the 
definition of the offence is expected to be further elaborated in other cases in the coming years.

Areas requiring attention in the future
The role of the internet in human trafficking will demand a lot of attention in the coming period. The 
importance of information and communication technology (ICT), also in relation to human trafficking, 
has grown enormously in a relatively short space of time. The internet is used to recruit potential victims, 
as a means of coercing victims with compromising photos or films or as a medium to exploit victims. 
Images of sexual acts with victims circulating on the internet constitute a new dimension to victimhood.
Young potential victims spend a large part of their lives in the internet environment, but that is not al-
ways true of those who have to protect them. There is, therefore, ground to be made up. Not only to learn 
more about the virtual world of young people, but also to make optimal use of the possibilities of ICT.

One area calling for attention is the development of the care for victims. Is further specialisation the 
correct approach (the pilot project on category-oriented shelter will provide more certainty about this)? 
What is particularly needed is a vision for the care that the youth care services should provide for un-
derage victims.

From the outset, the Rapporteur has made recommendations concerning the collection and proper 
registration of data. Since the Rapporteur does not perform executive tasks herself, she depends to a con-
siderable extent on how other organizations keep records, whether for their own operations or for the 
benefit of the Rapporteur. Compiling aggregated results from the data from the computerised systems 
of the relevant agencies, without their intervention, could be compatible with the role of independent 
observer and rapporteur. If it were to prove technically feasible to automate this task, BNRM would be 
the most logical choice to perform it.

2 See Appendix 3, table B3.4.
3 For a lengthy discussion of this judgment, see §§ 2.8.5.



The National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings in the Netherlands: Ten Years On
143

We are still a long way from reaching a situation where there is sufficient control of the Dutch prosti-
tution sector to substantially reduce vulnerability to exploitation in the sector; what is needed here are 
better and more uniform enforcement and supervision and control of the illegal sector. One cause for 
concern is the possible shift from window prostitution, which is in theory relatively easier to control, to 
other forms of sexual services that are more difficult to monitor. The proposed introduction of the Act 
to Regulate Prostitution and Combat Abuses in the Sex Industry and the evaluation of the effects it has 
are very important in this context.

The development of case-law on both sexual exploitation and other forms of exploitation will also 
remain an important topic in the coming period. This will include such aspects as specialisation wit-
hin the judiciary, the development of guidelines for sentencing and analysis of case-law. Attention will 
certainly be paid to the decline in the proportion of convictions in human trafficking cases in the last 
decade.

Finally, there may be a further expansion of the domain covered by the Rapporteur when part of the 
Netherlands Antilles becomes part of the Netherlands on 10 October 2010 as a result of constitutional 
reforms.

Conclusion
The post of National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings has now existed for 10 years in the Ne-
therlands. The approach chosen was to create an institution that, while part of the central government, 
occupies an entirely independent position, similar to an independent advisory body of the government. 
The Rapporteur is a full-time official with her own staff, whose core task is to report on the nature and 
scale of human trafficking and on the effects of policies to combat it.
With this structure, the Netherlands has created a powerful instrument. Through the appointment of an 
independent Rapporteur to evaluate policy and make recommendations on it, the Dutch government 
has arranged structural feedback. This can be regarded as a powerful model for the office of rapporteur. 
This robust instrument demonstrates the Dutch government’s determination to achieve tangible results 
in tackling human trafficking. The government further underlined its intentions by extending the Rap-
porteur’s mandate for at least another four years4 in 2009.

4 Decision of the Minister of Justice appointing the Rapporteur, 2009.  The appointment decision pro-
vides for an evaluation after four years, to be followed by a new decision on whether or not to extend 
the appointment.





0	 	Bibliography

Academic Network for Legal Studies on Immigration and Asylum in Europe. Synthesis Report, astablished 
for the European Commission, regarding the implementation bij EU-Memberstates of Directive 2004/81 (victims of traf-
ficking), JLS/B4/2006/03.

Adviescommissie voor Vreemdelingenzaken (ACVZ). (2009). De mens beschermd en de handel bestreden. Een 
advies over een evenwichtig beschermingsregime voor slachtoffers van mensenhandel. The Hague: ACVZ.

Anti-Slavery International. (2006). Trafficking for Forced Labour. UK Country Report. Londen: Anti-Slavery Inter-
national. Available via www.antislavery.org/includes/documents/cm_docs/2009/t/trafficking_for_for-
ced_labour_uk_country_report.pdf.

Aronowitz, A.A. (2009). Guidelines for the collection of data on trafficking in human beings, including comparable 
indicators. Vienna: IOM.

Balkestein, J.(1901). Rapport van een onderzoek naar den handel in vrouwen. Place unknown: Nationaal Comité 
tot bestrijding van den handel in vrouwen. 

Blekendaal, M. (2007). De handel in blanke slavinnen. Historisch Nieuwsblad, Nr. 7.

BNRM (2006). 6 jaar Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel: Een terugblik. The Hague Office of the NRM.

Boermans, B.(2009). Uitgebuit en in de bak! Slachtoffers van mensenhandel in vreemdelingendetentie. Amsterdam: 
BlinN-Humanitas/Oxfam Novib.

Boot-Matthijssen, M. (2010). Artikel 4 en de aanpak van mensenhandel. NJCM-Bulletin, jrg. 35 ( 5). 

Boutellier, H. & Goderie, M. (2009). Het slachtoffer en zijn ketens. Een studie naar mensenhandel in strafrechtelijk 
perspectief. Utrecht: Verwey-Jonker Instituut.

Bundeskriminalamt.(2009). Palermo-Protokoll und die Folgen. Bekämpfung des „Menschenhandels zum Zweck 
sexueller Ausbeutung“- Materialsammlung zu nationalen und internationalen eher strategisch ausgerichteten Aktivitäten. 
Wiesbaden: Bundeskriminalamt. Available via www.bka.de/kriminalwissenschaften/ebook_mh_sex_
ausbeutung/ebook_mh_sex_ausbeutung.html.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
146

Brouns, M. e.a. (2003). Het lange wachten op een veilige toekomst. Onderzoek naar veiligheid van vrouwen in Asiel-
zoekersopvang. Rijswijk: COA.

Caplan, A., Dominguez-Gil, B., Matesanz, R. & Prior, C. (2009). Trafficking in organs, tissues and cells and traf-
ficking in human beings for the purpose of the removal of organs. Raad van Europa/ Verenigde Naties

Claassen, S. (2005). “ Dan moeten ze maar hun mond opendoen!” Slachtoffers van mensenhandel in vreemdelingenbe-
waring. Amsterdam: BlinN-Humanitas/Oxfam Novib.

CoMensha (2010). Jaarverslag 2009. Amersfoort: CoMensha.

College van Procureurs-Generaal. (2006). Aanwijzing mensenhandel. College van Procureurs-Generaal.

College van Procureurs-Generaal. (2008). Aanwijzing mensenhandel. College van Procureurs-Generaal.

Coster van Voorhout, J. (2009). Human trafficking for labour exploitation. A framework for implementation of the 
crime of human trafficking for labour exploitation as defined in the European Council Framework Decision in EU countries. 
Utrecht: Science Shop of Law, Economics and Governance, Utrecht University.

Daalder, A.L. (2007). Prostitutie in Nederland na opheffing van het bordeelverbod. The Hague : Boom Juridische 
Uitgevers.

Defence for Children-ECPAT en Unicef (2009). Jaarbericht Kinderrechten 2009. Leiden: Defence for Children-ECPAT

Dijk, D., Hoekstra, L. & Nieuwenhout, Y. (2010). Als de nood aan de man is. Een verkennende studie naar de opvang 
van en hulpverlening aanmannelijke slachtoffers van (dreiging van) geweld in afhankelijkheidsrelaties. Rotterdam.

GAATW. (2007). Collateral Damage: The Impact of Anti-Trafficking Measures on Human Rights around the World . Avai-
lable via www.gaatw.org/Collateral%20Damage_Final/singlefile_CollateralDamagefinal.pdf

Gallagher, A.T. (2006). Human Trafficking: international law and international responsibility, diss. Universiteit van 
Utrecht. No publisher.

Gestel, B. van & Verhoeven, M. (2009). De praktijk van de programmatische aanpak mensenhandel. The Hague 
WODC. 

Hendriks, J. & Corsel, M. (2009). Handreiking. Ketenregie en bestuurlijk toezicht in de vergunde prostitutiesector. 
Task Force Mensenhandel. 

Hout, M.M.J. van & Laan, F.J. van der. (2008). Schone Schijn. De signalering van mensenhandel in de vergunde 
prostitutiesector. Driebergen: KLPD.
Human Trafficking, turning our attention to labour exploitation. (2009). Utrecht: Science Shop of Law, Economics 
and Governance, Utrecht University. To be found at www.bnrm.nl.

ILO. (2008). European Delphi survey on indicators of trafficking in Human Beings jointly implemented by the European 
Commission and the ILO. Wenen: ILO



147
Bibliography

ILO & the European Commission. (2009). Operational indicators of trafficking in human beings : results from a 
Delphi survey. Wenen: ILO.

Korterink, H.J. (2010). Echte mannen eten wél kaas. Amsterdam: Nieuw Amsterdam.

Kutnick, B., Belser, P. & Dainalova-Trainor, G. (2007). Methodologies for global and national estimation of human 
trafficking victims: current and future approaches. ILO: Geneve.

Kromhout, M.H.C., Liefaard, T., Galloway, A.M., Beenakkers, E.M.Th., Kamstra, B. & Aidala, R. (2010). 
Tussen beheersing en begeleiding. Een evaluatie van de pilot “Beschermde opvang risico-AMV’s”. Den Haag: WODC, 
cahier 2010 – 6.

Leun, J. van der & Vervoorn, L. (2004). Slavernij-achtige uitbuiting in Nederland. Een inventariserende literatuurstu-
die in het kader van de uitbreiding van de strafbaarstelling van mensenhandel. Den Haag: Boom Juridische uitgevers.

Mosterd, M. (2008). Echte mannen eten geen kaas. Amsterdam: Uitgeverij Van Gennep B.V.

Munckhof, R. van den, Huijsmans, E.C., Stassen-Kanters, M.M., Bijleveld, M., Linden, M. van der, Koks-
ma, H.W. et. al. (2010). Kenniscentra voor de rechtspraak. Trema 2010, nr. 6 , 249-255.

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel. (2002). Trafficking in human beings – First report of the Dutch National 
Rap porteur. The Hague: BNRM.

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel. (2003). Trafficking in human beings – Second report of the Dutch National 
Rapporteur. The Hague: BNRM.

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel. (2004). Trafficking in human beings – Third report of the Dutch National 
Rapporteur. The Hague: BNRM.

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel. (2005). Trafficking in human beings – Fourth report of the Dutch National 
Rapporteur. The Hague: BNRM.

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel. (2007). Trafficking in human beings – Fifth report of the Dutch National 
Rapporteur. The Hague:BNRM.

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel. (2008). Trafficking in human beings – Sixth report of the Dutch National 
Rapporteur. The Hague: BNRM.

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel. (2009). Trafficking in human beings – Seventh report of the Dutch National 
Rapporteur. The Hague: BNRM.

Openbaar Ministerie. (2010). Jaarbericht 2009. Available via www.jaarberichtom.nl.

ROOD Utrecht. (2009). In gesprek met slachtoffers van loverboys, een onderzoek naar ervaringen met politie en justitie 
van het proces van aangifte tot de veroordeling. Available via www.rood.utrecht.sp.nl.



Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring
148

Secherling, P.H.T. & Nelen, J.M. (1997). Financieel rechercheren in Nederland: een Literatuurverkenning, onderzoek-
snotities, nr. 1997/7. Den Haag: WODC. 

Silvis, J. (2010). Vooropgestelde arresten 2009. Ontwikkelingen in de strafrechtelijke jurisprudentie 2009. Den Haag: 
Sdu.

Steenhuis, D.W. (2010). Alles is niets. Rapportage naar aanleiding van de niet-ontvankelijkheid in de mensenhandelzaak 
Sierra. OM. Available via www.om.nl/publish/pages/120785/rapport_sierra.pdf. 

Surtees, R. (2008). Handbook on Anti-Trafficking Data Collection in South-Eastern Europe: Developing Regional Criteria. 
Wenen: ICMPD.

Surtees, R. (2009). Anti-Trafficking Data Collection and Information Management in the European Union – a Handbook, 
the situation in the Czech Republic, Poland, Portugal and the Slovak Republic. Wenen: ICMPD

Task Force Aanpak Mensenhandel, 2009a. Plan van aanpak Task Force Aanpak Mensenhandel. Available via 
www.om.nl.

Task Force Aanpak Mensenhandel, 2009b. Voortgangsrapportage. Stand van zaken september 2009. (not 
published).

United States Department of State. (2010). Trafficking in Persons report 2010. Available via www.state.gov/g/
tip/rls/tiprpt/2010/.

Vermeulen, G. (ed.). (2007). Betaalseksrecht, naar regulering of legalisering van niet problematische prostitutie? 
Antwerpen-Apeldoorn: Maklu. 

Vermeulen, G. & Paterson, N. (2010). The MONTRASEC demo, A bench-mark for member state and EU automated 
data collection and reporting on trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation of children. Gent: IRCP.
Zanetti, V.(2009). De digitale loverboy. Proces 88 (5), 280-292.



Appendix





A1	 Article	273f	of	the	Dutch	criminal	code
	 	 (non-official	translation)

I	 	Article	273f	of	the	Dutch	Criminal	Code	(valid	until	1	July	2009)

1. Any person who:
(a)  by force, violence or other act, by the threat of violence or other act, by extortion, fraud, deception or 

the misuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs, by the misuse of a vulnerable position 
or by giving or receiving remuneration or benefits in order to obtain the consent of a person who 
has control over this other person recruits, transports, moves, accommodates or shelters another 
person, with the intention of exploiting this other person or removing his or her organs;

(b)  recruits, transports, moves, accommodates or shelters a person with the intention of exploiting that 
other person or removing his or her organs, when that person has not yet reached the age of eighteen 
years;

(c)  recruits, takes with him or abducts a person with the intention of inducing that person to make 
himself/herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration in 
another country;

(d)  forces or induces another person by the means referred to under (a) to make himself/ herself avai-
lable for performing work or services or making his/her organs available or takes any action in the 
circumstances referred to under (a) which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know will 
result in that other person making himself/herself available for performing labour or services or 
making his/her organs available;

(e)  induces another person to make himself/herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a 
third party for remuneration or to make his/her organs available for remuneration or takes any action 
towards another person which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that this will result 
in that other person making himself/ herself available for performing these acts or making his/her 
organs available for remuneration, when that other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen 
years;

(f )  willfully profits from the exploitation of another person;
(g)  willfully profits from the removal of organs from another person, while he knows or may reasonably 

be expected to know that the organs of that person have been removed under the circumstances 
referred to under (a);

(h)  willfully profits from the sexual acts of another person with or for a third party for remuneration or 
the removal of that person’s organs for remuneration, when this other person has not yet reached 
the age of eighteen years;

(i)  forces or induces another person by the means referred to under (a) to provide him with the proceeds 
of that person’s sexual acts with or for a third party or of the removal of that person’s organs; shall 



152
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

be guilty of trafficking in human beings and as such liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 
six years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties:

2.  Exploitation comprises at least the exploitation of another person in prostitution, other forms 
of sexual exploitation, forced or compulsory labour or services, slavery, slavery like practices or 
servitude.

3.  The following offences shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding eight years 
and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties:

(a)  offences as described in the first paragraph if they are committed by two or more persons acting in 
concert;

(b)  offences as described in the first paragraph if such offences are committed in respect of a person who 
is under the age of sixteen.

4.  The offences as described in the first paragraph, committed by two or more persons acting in con-
cert under the circumstance referred to in paragraph 3 under (b), shall be punishable with a term of 
imprisonment not exceeding ten years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties.

5.  If one of the offences described in the first paragraph results in serious physical injury or threatens 
the life of another person, it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve 
years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties.

6.  If one of the offences referred to in the first paragraph results in death, it shall be punishable with 
a term of imprisonment not exceeding fifteen years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these 
penalties.

7.  Article 251 is applicable mutatis mutandis.
* A fifth category fine is a fine of maximum €67.000.

I	I	 	Article	273f	of	the	Dutch	Criminal	Code	(valid	from	1	July	2009)

1. Any person who:
(a)  by force, violence or other act, by the threat of violence or other act, by extortion, fraud, deception or 

the misuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs, by the misuse of a vulnerable position 
or by giving or receiving remuneration or benefits in order to obtain the consent of a person who 
has control over this other person recruits, transports, moves, accommodates or shelters another 
person, with the intention of exploiting this other person or removing his or her organs;

(b)  recruits, transports, moves, accommodates or shelters a person with the intention of exploiting that 
other person or removing his or her organs, when that person has not yet reached the age of eighteen 
years;

(c)  recruits, takes with him or abducts a person with the intention of inducing that person to make 
himself/herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration in 
another country;

(d   forces or induces another person by the means referred to under (a) to make himself/ herself avai-
lable for performing work or services or making his/her organs available or takes any action in the 
circumstances referred to under (a) which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know will 
result in that other person making himself/herself available for performing labour or services or 
making his/her organs available;

(e)  induces another person to make himself/herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a 
third party for remuneration or to make his/her organs available for remuneration or takes any action 
towards another person which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that this will result 



153
Article 273f of the Dutch criminal code (non-official translation)

in that other person making himself/ herself available for performing these acts or making his/her 
organs available for remuneration, when that other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen 
years;

(f )  wilfully profits from the exploitation of another person;
(g)  wilfully profits from the removal of organs from another person, while he knows or may reasonably 

be expected to know that the organs of that person have been removed under the circumstances 
referred to under (a);

(h)  wilfully profits from the sexual acts of another person with or for a third party for remuneration or 
the removal of that person’s organs for remuneration, when this other person has not yet reached 
the age of eighteen years;

(i)  forces or induces another person by the means referred to under (a) to provide him with the proceeds 
of that person’s sexual acts with or for a third party or of the remo val of that person’s organs; shall 
be guilty of trafficking in human beings and as such liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding 
eight years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties:

2.  Exploitation comprises at least the exploitation of another person in prostitution, other forms 
of sexual exploitation, forced or compulsory labour or services, slavery, slavery like practices or 
servitude.

3.  The following offences shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve years 
and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties:

(a)  offences as described in the first paragraph if they are committed by two or more persons acting in 
concert;

(b)  offences as described in the first paragraph if such offences are committed in respect of a person who 
is under the age of sixteen.

4.  If one of the offences described in the first paragraph results in serious physical injury or threatens 
the life of another person, it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding fifteen 
years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties.

5.  If one of the offences referred to in the first paragraph results in death, it shall be punishable with 
a term of imprisonment not exceeding eighteen years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these 
penalties.

6.  Article 251 is applicable mutatis mutandis.
*  A fifth category fine is a fine of maximum €67.000





A2	 	Explanatory	notes	to	Figures,	Tables	
and	Statistics

1 Notes to the tables
This report contains a great many tables (particularly in Appendix 3: Additional Tables). The following 
remarks are relevant for the interpretation of the tables.
The totals in the tables do not always come to precisely 100% because figures are rounded off. However, 
to make the tables easier to read the totals are always given as 100%.
If a column in a table contains numbers, the letter N appears at the top of the column to denote the 
word ‘number’.
If a column in a table contains a ranking, the letter R appears at the top of the column to denote the 
word ‘rank’.
In the tables a dash (-) is used to represent the number zero and to indicate that the associated percen-
tage is 0%. If the number is higher than zero but the percentage is 0% after rounding off, 0% is used 
instead of a dash.

2 Notes to the figures
This report contains a great many figures that are based on the additional tables in Appendix 3. The fol-
lowing remarks are relevant for the interpretation of these figures.
In figures that show a trend in absolute terms (numbers), a line graph is used. If there is more than one 
line in the figure they represent trends that can be compared, unless they are dotted lines, in which case 
the trends are not comparable.
In figures that show a trend in relative terms (percentages), bar charts are used.
In figures that provide an overview (of one particular period), pie charts are used.

3 Notes to the statistics

Standard deviation (Sd)
Averages are sometimes given in this report, for example the average age of suspects and offenders. The 
number (N, see above) and the standard deviation (Sd) are sometimes also given. The standard devia-
tion expresses the range in the numbers over which the average is calculated. The higher the standard 
deviation, the greater the range.

Index figure
Some tables include an index figure. The index figure shows by how many the number – of suspects, for 
example – in a particular year has changed in relation to a reference year. The reference year is shown at 
the top of the table. The figure for that year is 1.0. An index figure higher than 1.0 indicates an increase 
and an index figure lower than 1.0 indicates a decline in relation to the reference year.



156
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Significance
When differences shown have proved significant (meaningful), the probability level (p-value) is given in 
a footnote. A p-value of 0.05 means that the chance that a difference shown is based on coincidence is 
5%. A difference is significant when the chance that the difference is not based on coincidence is equal 
to or greater than 95% (p≤0.05). When the chance is equal to or greater than 99% (p≤0.01), it is said to 
be very significant.



A3	 Additional	tables

Tables B3.1 to B3.10 supplement § 3.3.1 (Victims in the CoMensha register);
Tables B3.11 to B3.17 supplement § 3.3.2 (Victims and the B9 regulation);
Tables B3.18 to B3.21 supplement § 3.3.3 (Victims and compensation);
Tables B3.22 to B3.29 supplement § 3.4.1 (Suspects and offenders: Prosecution);
Tables B3.30 to B3.36 supplement § 3.4.2 (Suspects and offenders: Trial (in first instance));
Tables B3.37 to B3.41 supplement § 3.4.2 (Suspects and offenders: Trial (on appeal)) and;
Tables B3.42 to B3.50 supplement § 3.4.3 (Suspects and offenders: Characteristics).

Supplement	to	§	3.3.1:	Victims	in	the	CoMensha	register
Tables B3.1 to B3.10 provide a complete overview of the available data on victims reported to CoMensha 
over the last decade. See § 3.3.1 for an explanation of the research method and Appendix 2 for explanatory 
notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics.

Table B3.1 Number of victims reported to CoMensha (2000-2009)

Number	of	victims	(N) Index	figure	(2000=1.0)
Percentage	growth	compared	

with	the	preceding	year

2000 341 1.0 -

2001 284 0.8 -17%

2002 343 1.0 21%

2003 257 0.8 -25%

2004 405 1.2 58%

2005 424 1.2 5%

2006 579 1.7 37%

2007 716 2.1 24%

2008 826 2.4 15%

2009 909 2.7 10%

Total 5084 n. a. n. a.

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases



158
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.2 Gender of victims reported to CoMensha (2000-2009)1

Female Male Unknown

N % N % N %

2000 almost all 100% almost none 0% - -

2001 almost all 100% almost none 0% - -

2002 almost all 100% almost none 0% - -

2003 257 100% 0 0% - -

2004 404 100% 1 0% - -

2005 422 100% 2 0% - -

2006 549 95% 30 5% - -

2007 664 93% 49 7% 3 0%

2008 779 94% 46 6% 1 0%

2009 770 85% 138 15% 1 0%

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases

1 Since 2003, CoMensha has registered the gender of the victims. In the period 2000-2002 there were 
only a few male victims (information received verbally and in writing from CoMensha).



159
Additional tables

Table B3.3 Age of victims reported to CoMensha (2001-2009)2

133

10-14	 15-17	 18-23	 24-30	 31-40	 41	and	over Unknown

N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

2001 2 1% 25 9% 86 30% 39 14% 12 4% 1 0% 119 42%

2002 - - 41 12% 130 38% 56 16% 19 6% 5 1% 92 27%

2003 2 1% 18 7% 112 44% 54 21% 25 10% 5 2% 41 16%

2004 3 1% 23 6% 165 41% 141 35% 61 15% - - 12 3%

2005 1 0% 23 5% 167 39% 150 35% 50 12% 15 4% 18 4%

2006 10 2% 93 16% 222 38% 151 26% 66 11% 9 2% 28 5%

2007 29 4% 170 24% 288 40% 140 20% 70 10% 19 3% - -

2008 7 1% 162 20% 321 39% 196 24% 108 13% 32 4% - -

2009 11 1% 100 11% 352 39% 249 27% 126 14% 58 6% 133 1%

Total	
since	
2001

65 1% 655 14% 1843 39% 1175 25% 537 11% 144 3% 324 7%

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases

2 Since 2001, CoMensha has registered the age of the victims. The age groups in the period 2001-2003 
are slightly different: 10-13, 14-17, 18-23, 24-29, 30-39, 40 and over, unknown.

3 The precise age of these 13 reported victims is not known, but five victims were (probably) adults 
 (information received verbally and in writing from CoMensha).



160
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.4 Nationality of victims reported to CoMensha (2000-2009)

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Afghan - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0% 4 0%

Albanian 5 1% 4 1% 8 2% 2 1% 8 2% 2 0% 1 0% - - 2 0% 4 0% 36 1% *

Algerian 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Angolan - - 1 0% 3 1% 2 1% 2 0% 8 2% 2 0% 1 0% 5 1% 4 0% 28 1% *

Antigua	and	Barbudan - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Armenian - - - - - - 3 1% 3 1% - - 4 1% 2 0% 2 0% 3 0% 17 0%

Azerbaijani - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 3 0%

Belarussian 2 1% 1 0% 8 2% - - 12 3% 3 1% - - 2 0% 1 0% 1 0% 30 1% **

Belgian - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% - - - - - - 4 0%

Bengali - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 3 1% - - - - - - 4 0%

Beninois - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 2 0% - - - - 1 0% 3 0% 8 0%

Bolivian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Bosnian - - 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% - - 2 0% 1 0% 1 0% 8 0%

Brazilian - - 1 0% - -
12

(5)
5% 5 1% 8 2% 17 3% 4 1% 13 2% 14 2% 74 1% **

British - - - - - - - - 2 0% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Bulgarian 19 (3’) 6% 40 (1) 14%
59

(1)
17%

48

(1)
19% 55 (2) 14%

52

(2)
12% 39 (3) 7% 50 (3) 7% 32 4%

39

(5)
4% 433 9% 3

Burkinan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Burundian - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 3 0% - - 1 0% 8 0%

Cameroonian 4 1% 2 1% 10 3% 5 2% 11 3% 4 1% 4 1% 6 1% 11 1% 15 2% 72 1% **

Canadian - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 0%

Cape	Verdean - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - 2 0%

Chilean - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% 2 0% 2 0% - - 6 0%

Chinese
19

(3’)
6% 10 4% 8 2% 8 3% 9 2% 5 1% 29 (5) 5%

33

(4)
5%

78

(2)
9% 37 4% 236 5% 5

Colombian 2 1% 1 0% 2 1% 1 0% 4 1% 1 0% - - 1 0% 5 1% 1 0% 18 0% *

Comoran - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0%

Congolese 4 1% 1 0% 3 1% 1 0% - - 3 1% 5 1% 5 1% 3 0% 5 1% 30 1% *

Croat - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0%

Cuban - - - - 3 1% - - 2 0% - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Czech 14 4% 8 3% 6 2% 3 1% 2 0%
18

(5)
4% 3 1% 4 1% 7 1% 3 0% 68 1% **

Danish - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Dominican 4 1% - - 3 1% - - 2 0% 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 12 0%



161
Additional tables

Table B3.4 Nationality of victims reported to CoMensha (2000-2009)

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Afghan - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0% 4 0%

Albanian 5 1% 4 1% 8 2% 2 1% 8 2% 2 0% 1 0% - - 2 0% 4 0% 36 1% *

Algerian 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Angolan - - 1 0% 3 1% 2 1% 2 0% 8 2% 2 0% 1 0% 5 1% 4 0% 28 1% *

Antigua	and	Barbudan - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Armenian - - - - - - 3 1% 3 1% - - 4 1% 2 0% 2 0% 3 0% 17 0%

Azerbaijani - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 3 0%

Belarussian 2 1% 1 0% 8 2% - - 12 3% 3 1% - - 2 0% 1 0% 1 0% 30 1% **

Belgian - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% - - - - - - 4 0%

Bengali - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 3 1% - - - - - - 4 0%

Beninois - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 2 0% - - - - 1 0% 3 0% 8 0%

Bolivian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Bosnian - - 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% - - 2 0% 1 0% 1 0% 8 0%

Brazilian - - 1 0% - -
12

(5)
5% 5 1% 8 2% 17 3% 4 1% 13 2% 14 2% 74 1% **

British - - - - - - - - 2 0% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Bulgarian 19 (3’) 6% 40 (1) 14%
59

(1)
17%

48

(1)
19% 55 (2) 14%

52

(2)
12% 39 (3) 7% 50 (3) 7% 32 4%

39

(5)
4% 433 9% 3

Burkinan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Burundian - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 3 0% - - 1 0% 8 0%

Cameroonian 4 1% 2 1% 10 3% 5 2% 11 3% 4 1% 4 1% 6 1% 11 1% 15 2% 72 1% **

Canadian - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 0%

Cape	Verdean - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - 2 0%

Chilean - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% 2 0% 2 0% - - 6 0%

Chinese
19

(3’)
6% 10 4% 8 2% 8 3% 9 2% 5 1% 29 (5) 5%

33

(4)
5%

78

(2)
9% 37 4% 236 5% 5

Colombian 2 1% 1 0% 2 1% 1 0% 4 1% 1 0% - - 1 0% 5 1% 1 0% 18 0% *

Comoran - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0%

Congolese 4 1% 1 0% 3 1% 1 0% - - 3 1% 5 1% 5 1% 3 0% 5 1% 30 1% *

Croat - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0%

Cuban - - - - 3 1% - - 2 0% - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Czech 14 4% 8 3% 6 2% 3 1% 2 0%
18

(5)
4% 3 1% 4 1% 7 1% 3 0% 68 1% **

Danish - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Dominican 4 1% - - 3 1% - - 2 0% 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 12 0%



162
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Dutch
25

(2)
7%

11

(5)
4%

18

(4)
5% 11 4%

59

(1)
15%

98

(1)
23%

146

(1)
25%

270

(1)
38%

320

(1)
39%

240

(1)
26% 1198 24% 1

Ecuadorian - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Egyptian - - 2 1% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0% 1 0% 6 0%

Eritrean - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Estonian 3 1% 1 0% - - 2 1% 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 9 0%

Ethiopian 2 1% - - 1 0% 2 1% 2 0% 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% 11 0%

Finnish - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0%

French - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - 3 0%

Gambian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4 1% 2 0% 6 0%

Georgian - - 2 1% 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% - - 3 0% 1 0% 10 0%

German 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 2 0% - - 3 0% 7 1% 3 0% 19 0% *

Ghanaian 4 1% 2 1% 2 1% 1 0% 6 1% 2 0% 1 0% 8 1% 9 1% 23 3% 58 1% **

Greek - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0%

Guinea-Bissauan - - - - - - - - 5 1% 4 1% - - - - 1 0% - - 10 0% *

Guinean 1 0% 3 1% 6 2% 5 2% 3 1% 4 1% 8 1% 15 2% 20 2% 35 4% 100 2% 10

Guyanese - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Hungarian 6 2% 4 1% 1 0% - - 3 1% 9 2% 13 2% 15 2%
45

(4)
5%

47

(4)
5% 143 3% 7

Indian - - - - - - - - - - - - 7 1% 3 0% 13 2% 6 1% 29 1% **

Indonesian - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% - - 1 0% 17 2% 22 0% **

Iranian - - - - 1 0% - - 5 1% - - 3 1% 1 0% 1 0% 2 0% 13 0% *

Iraqi 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0% - - - - - - - - 3 0% 6 0%

Irish - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Italian - - 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 5 0%

Ivorian 1 0% - - 4 1% 2 1% 2 0% - - - - 2 0% 3 0% 6 1% 20 0% *

Jamaican - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Kazach - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Kenyan - - - - - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 3 1% 3 0% 3 0% - - 12 0%

Kirghiz - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 3 0%

Kuwaiti - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Latvian 9 3% 1 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% 3 1% 3 1% 2 0% - - 9 1% 29 1% *

Lebanese - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0%

Liberian 4 1% 4 1% - - 2 1% 1 0% 1 0% - - 2 0% 3 0% 5 1% 22 0% *

Lithuanian 10 3% 10 4% 13 4% 9 4% 3 1% 3 1% 6 1% 3 0% 8 1% 5 1% 70 1% **

Continued table B3.4



163
Additional tables

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Dutch
25

(2)
7%

11

(5)
4%

18

(4)
5% 11 4%

59

(1)
15%

98

(1)
23%

146

(1)
25%

270

(1)
38%

320

(1)
39%

240

(1)
26% 1198 24% 1

Ecuadorian - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Egyptian - - 2 1% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0% 1 0% 6 0%

Eritrean - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Estonian 3 1% 1 0% - - 2 1% 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 9 0%

Ethiopian 2 1% - - 1 0% 2 1% 2 0% 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% 11 0%

Finnish - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0%

French - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - 3 0%

Gambian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 4 1% 2 0% 6 0%

Georgian - - 2 1% 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% - - 3 0% 1 0% 10 0%

German 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 2 0% - - 3 0% 7 1% 3 0% 19 0% *

Ghanaian 4 1% 2 1% 2 1% 1 0% 6 1% 2 0% 1 0% 8 1% 9 1% 23 3% 58 1% **

Greek - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0%

Guinea-Bissauan - - - - - - - - 5 1% 4 1% - - - - 1 0% - - 10 0% *

Guinean 1 0% 3 1% 6 2% 5 2% 3 1% 4 1% 8 1% 15 2% 20 2% 35 4% 100 2% 10

Guyanese - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Hungarian 6 2% 4 1% 1 0% - - 3 1% 9 2% 13 2% 15 2%
45

(4)
5%

47

(4)
5% 143 3% 7

Indian - - - - - - - - - - - - 7 1% 3 0% 13 2% 6 1% 29 1% **

Indonesian - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% - - 1 0% 17 2% 22 0% **

Iranian - - - - 1 0% - - 5 1% - - 3 1% 1 0% 1 0% 2 0% 13 0% *

Iraqi 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0% - - - - - - - - 3 0% 6 0%

Irish - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Italian - - 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 5 0%

Ivorian 1 0% - - 4 1% 2 1% 2 0% - - - - 2 0% 3 0% 6 1% 20 0% *

Jamaican - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Kazach - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Kenyan - - - - - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 3 1% 3 0% 3 0% - - 12 0%

Kirghiz - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 3 0%

Kuwaiti - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Latvian 9 3% 1 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% 3 1% 3 1% 2 0% - - 9 1% 29 1% *

Lebanese - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0%

Liberian 4 1% 4 1% - - 2 1% 1 0% 1 0% - - 2 0% 3 0% 5 1% 22 0% *

Lithuanian 10 3% 10 4% 13 4% 9 4% 3 1% 3 1% 6 1% 3 0% 8 1% 5 1% 70 1% **



164
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Luxembourgeois - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Macedonian - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Malawi 11 3% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 11 0% **

Malaysian - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 2 0% 3 0%

Mauritanian - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Mexican - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Moldavian 6 2% 9 3% 14 4% 1 0% 6 1% 2 0% 3 1% - - - - 1 0% 42 1% **

Mongolian 1 0% - - 2 1% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 4 1% 4 1% 7 1% 21 0% *

Moroccan 6 2% 1 0% 4 1% 2 1% 11 4% 11 3% 9 2% 13 2% 10 1% 15 2% 82 2% **

Namibian - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - 3 0%

Nepalese - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% 2 0%

Nicaraguan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Nigerian
41

(1)
12%

15

(4)
5%

45

(2)
13%

21

(3)
8%

39

(4)
10%

28

(3)
7%

86

(2)
15%

104

(2)
15%

64

(3)
8%

101

(2)
11% 544 11% 2

Nigerien - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 2 0%

North	Korean - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0%

Norwegian - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Pakistani - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 3 0% 4 0%

Philippine 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 2 0% - - - - 2 0% 6 1% 1 0% 13 0% *

Polish 12 4% 4 1% 9 3% 3 1% 8 2% 13 3% 27 5% 14 2% 6 1% 19 2% 115 2% 9

Portuguese - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 4 0% 7 0%

Romanian 10 3% 4 1%
22

(3)
6%

31

(2)
12%

45

(3)
11%

23

(4)
5%

34

(4)
6% 28 4% 19 2%

89

(3)
10% 305 6% 4

Russian
(Soviet	Russian)

19

(3’)
6%

27

(2)
10%

16

(5)
5% 11 4%

14

(5)
3% 13 3% 12 2% 9 1% 5 1% 4 0% 130 3% 8

Rwandan - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% - - 2 0% 6 0%

Senegalese - - - - - - - - 2 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 5 0%

Serbian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 3 0% 4 0%

Sierra	Leonean 10 3% 6 2% 12 3% 11 4% 6 1% 14 3% 20 3%
29

(5)
4%

44

(5)
5% 35 4% 187 4% 6

Slovak 5 1% 1 0% 2 1% 2 1% 3 1% 10 2% 2 0% 3 0% 7 1% 1 0% 36 1% **

Somali 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 5 1% 3 0% 5 1% 18 0% *

South	African - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% - - - - 1 0% 3 0%

Spanish - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Sri	Lankan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Continued table B3.4



165
Additional tables

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Luxembourgeois - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Macedonian - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Malawi 11 3% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 11 0% **

Malaysian - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 2 0% 3 0%

Mauritanian - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Mexican - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Moldavian 6 2% 9 3% 14 4% 1 0% 6 1% 2 0% 3 1% - - - - 1 0% 42 1% **

Mongolian 1 0% - - 2 1% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 4 1% 4 1% 7 1% 21 0% *

Moroccan 6 2% 1 0% 4 1% 2 1% 11 4% 11 3% 9 2% 13 2% 10 1% 15 2% 82 2% **

Namibian - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - 3 0%

Nepalese - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% 2 0%

Nicaraguan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Nigerian
41

(1)
12%

15

(4)
5%

45

(2)
13%

21

(3)
8%

39

(4)
10%

28

(3)
7%

86

(2)
15%

104

(2)
15%

64

(3)
8%

101

(2)
11% 544 11% 2

Nigerien - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 2 0%

North	Korean - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0%

Norwegian - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Pakistani - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 3 0% 4 0%

Philippine 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 2 0% - - - - 2 0% 6 1% 1 0% 13 0% *

Polish 12 4% 4 1% 9 3% 3 1% 8 2% 13 3% 27 5% 14 2% 6 1% 19 2% 115 2% 9

Portuguese - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 4 0% 7 0%

Romanian 10 3% 4 1%
22

(3)
6%

31

(2)
12%

45

(3)
11%

23

(4)
5%

34

(4)
6% 28 4% 19 2%

89

(3)
10% 305 6% 4

Russian
(Soviet	Russian)

19

(3’)
6%

27

(2)
10%

16

(5)
5% 11 4%

14

(5)
3% 13 3% 12 2% 9 1% 5 1% 4 0% 130 3% 8

Rwandan - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% - - 2 0% 6 0%

Senegalese - - - - - - - - 2 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 5 0%

Serbian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 3 0% 4 0%

Sierra	Leonean 10 3% 6 2% 12 3% 11 4% 6 1% 14 3% 20 3%
29

(5)
4%

44

(5)
5% 35 4% 187 4% 6

Slovak 5 1% 1 0% 2 1% 2 1% 3 1% 10 2% 2 0% 3 0% 7 1% 1 0% 36 1% **

Somali 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 5 1% 3 0% 5 1% 18 0% *

South	African - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% - - - - 1 0% 3 0%

Spanish - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Sri	Lankan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%



166
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Sudanese 4 1% 1 0% 1 0% - - 2 0% 1 0% 2 0% 2 0% 2 0% 3 0% 18 0%

Surinamese 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 3 1% 1 0% 2 0% 6 1% 4 1% 8 1% 28 1% *

Swedish - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Syrian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Tadzjik - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Taiwanese - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - - - - - 4 1% 1 0% 7 0%

Tanzanean - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 0%

Thai 4 1% - - 3 1% 5 2% 2 0% 2 0% 3 1% 9 1% 12 2% 5 1% 45 1% **

Togolese 3 1% 2 1% 6 2% 2 1% 2 0% 2 0% 2 0% 2 0% 1 0% 4 0% 26 1% *

Trinidad	and	Tobagoan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0%

Tunisian - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Turkish 1 0% - - 5 1% 1 0% 2 0% 2 0% 5 1% 8 1% 1 0% 1 0% 26 1% *

Ugandan - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 1% - - 4 1% - - 3 0% 1 0% 10 1% 23 0% **

Ukrainian 12 4%
18

(3)
6% 5 1%

14

(4)
5% 8 2% 10 2% 10 2% 4 1% 5 1% 5 1% 91 2% **

Uzbek - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0% 6 0%

Venezuelan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% 2 0% 1 0% 5 0%

Vietnamese 2 1% 1 0% - - - - 3 1% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 2 0% 11 0%

Yugoslavian 1 0% 3 1% - - 1 0% 2 0% 5 1% 1 0% 6 1% 1 0% 1 0% 21 0% *

Zambian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Zimbabwean - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Unknown 49 14% 72 25% 21 6% 19 7% 18 4% 27 6% 38 7% 2 0% 6 1% 17 2% 269 5%

Total 341 100% 284 100% 343 100% 257 100% 405 100% 424 100% 579 100% 716 100% 826 100% 909 100% 5084 100%

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases
Dark blue shading: This nationality was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this nationality was in the top 10 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*   Is not in the top 10 overall, but five or more of the victims reported to CoMensha in at least one of the years (2000-2009) 

had this nationality.
**   Is not in the top 10 overall, but ten or more of the victims reported to CoMensha in at least one of the years (2000-2009) 

had this nationality.

Continued Table B3.4



167
Additional tables

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Sudanese 4 1% 1 0% 1 0% - - 2 0% 1 0% 2 0% 2 0% 2 0% 3 0% 18 0%

Surinamese 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 3 1% 1 0% 2 0% 6 1% 4 1% 8 1% 28 1% *

Swedish - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Syrian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Tadzjik - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Taiwanese - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - - - - - 4 1% 1 0% 7 0%

Tanzanean - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 0%

Thai 4 1% - - 3 1% 5 2% 2 0% 2 0% 3 1% 9 1% 12 2% 5 1% 45 1% **

Togolese 3 1% 2 1% 6 2% 2 1% 2 0% 2 0% 2 0% 2 0% 1 0% 4 0% 26 1% *

Trinidad	and	Tobagoan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0%

Tunisian - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Turkish 1 0% - - 5 1% 1 0% 2 0% 2 0% 5 1% 8 1% 1 0% 1 0% 26 1% *

Ugandan - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 1% - - 4 1% - - 3 0% 1 0% 10 1% 23 0% **

Ukrainian 12 4%
18

(3)
6% 5 1%

14

(4)
5% 8 2% 10 2% 10 2% 4 1% 5 1% 5 1% 91 2% **

Uzbek - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0% 6 0%

Venezuelan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% 2 0% 1 0% 5 0%

Vietnamese 2 1% 1 0% - - - - 3 1% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 2 0% 11 0%

Yugoslavian 1 0% 3 1% - - 1 0% 2 0% 5 1% 1 0% 6 1% 1 0% 1 0% 21 0% *

Zambian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Zimbabwean - - - - - - - - - - 2 0% - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Unknown 49 14% 72 25% 21 6% 19 7% 18 4% 27 6% 38 7% 2 0% 6 1% 17 2% 269 5%

Total 341 100% 284 100% 343 100% 257 100% 405 100% 424 100% 579 100% 716 100% 826 100% 909 100% 5084 100%

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases
Dark blue shading: This nationality was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this nationality was in the top 10 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*   Is not in the top 10 overall, but five or more of the victims reported to CoMensha in at least one of the years (2000-2009) 

had this nationality.
**   Is not in the top 10 overall, but ten or more of the victims reported to CoMensha in at least one of the years (2000-2009) 

had this nationality.



168
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.5 Nationality of underage victims reported to CoMensha (2006-2009)4

Nationality		
of	underage	
victims

2006 2007 2008 2009
Total

2006-2009 Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % R

Afghan - - - - - - 2 2% 2 0%

Angolan - - - - 2 1% - - 2 0%

Armenian 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Azerbaijani - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Beninois - - - - 1 1% 1 1% 2 0%

Brazilian - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Bulgarian
5

(5)
5%

6

(4)
3% 1 1% 1 1% 13 2% *

Cameroonian - - 1 1% 2 1% 1 1% 4 1%

Chinese
6

(3’)
6%

4

(5’)
2%

14

(2)
8%

3

(5)
3% 27 5% 3

Colombian - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Congolese 2 2% 2 1% - - - - 4 1%

Dutch
35

(1)
34%

100

(1)
50%

104

(1)
62%

63

(1)
57% 302 52% 1

Egyptian - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Gambian - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

German - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Ghanaian - - 2 1% - - - - 2 0%

Guinea-
Bissauan

- - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Guinean 1 1% 3 2%
11

(3)
7%

8

(3)
7% 23 4% 4

Hungarian - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Indian - - 2 1% 1 1% - - 3 1%

Indonesian - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Iranian - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Iraqi - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Italian 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Ivorian - - - - - - 2 2% 2 0%

4 From 2006, a relationship can be established between age and nationality.



169
Additional tables

Nationality		
of	underage	
victims

2006 2007 2008 2009
Total

2006-2009 Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % R

Jamaican - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Lithuanian 1 1% - - - - 2 2% 3 1%

Mongolian 1 1% - - 2 1% - - 3 1%

Moroccan 2 2% 3 2% 1 1% 1 1% 7 1%

Nigerian
32

(2)
31%

50

(2)
25%

7

(5)
4%

10

(2)
9% 99 17% 2

Philippine - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Polish - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Romanian 4 4%
10

(3)
5% 1 1% 1 1% 16 3% **

Russian 1 1% 1 1% 1 1% - - 3 1%

Serbian - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Sierra	Leonean
6

(3’)
6%

4

(5’)
2%

8

(4)
5%

3

(4)
3% 21 4% 5

Slovak - - - - 4 2% - - 4 1%

Somali 1 1% 1 1% 1 1% 3 1%

Sudanese - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Surinamese 2 2% 2 1% - - - - 4 1%

Taiwanese - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Thai - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Turkish 1 1% 3 2% - - 1 1% 5 1%

Ugandan - - 2 1% - - 1 1% 3 1%

Ukrainian - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Uzbek - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Zimbabwean - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Unknown 2 2% - - - - - - 2 0%

Total 103 100% 199 100% 169 100% 111 100% 582 100%

Source: STV/CoMensha databases
Dark blue shading: This nationality was in the top five in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this nationality was in the top five overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*  Is not in the top five overall, but five or more of the underage victims reported to CoMensha in at least one of the years 

(2006-2009) had this nationality.
**  Is not in the top five overall, but ten or more of the underage victims reported to CoMensha in at least one of the years 

(2006-2009) had this nationality.

Continued Table B3.5



170
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.6 Nationality of male victims reported to CoMensha (2006-2009)5

Nationality	of	
male	victims 2006 2007 2008 2009

Total	
2006-2009 Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % R

Afghan - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1%

Angolan - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1%

Armenian 1 3% 1 2% - - - - 2 1%

Azerbaijani 1 3% - - - - 1 1% 2 1%

Bengali
3

(3’)
10% - - - - - - 3 1%

Beninois - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1%

Brazilian - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Bulgarian 1 3% 1 2% - - - - 2 1%

Cameroonian 1 3% - - 1 2% - - 2 1%

Canadian - - - - 1 2% - - 1 0%

Chilean 1 3% 2 4% 1 2% - - 4 2%

Chinese
4

(2)
13%

5

(3’)
10%

12

(1)
26%

11

(2)
8% 32 12% 2

Congolese 2 7% - - - - - - 2 1%

Dutch - -
5

(3’)
10%

3

(5)
7%

6

(5’)
4% 14 5% 5

Egyptian - - - - 2 4% 1 1% 3 1%

Georgian - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

German - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Ghanaian - - - - - -
10

(3’)
7% 10 4% **

Guinean - - 1 2% - - 3 2% 4 2%

Hungarian - - 1 2% - - 3 2% 4 2%

Indian
7

(1)
23%

3

(5) 
6%

8

(2)
17% 5 4% 23 9% 4

5 From 2006, a relationship can be established between gender and nationality.



171
Additional tables

Nationality	of	
male	victims 2006 2007 2008 2009

Total	
2006-2009 Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % R

Indonesian - - - - - -
10

(3’)
7% 10 4% **

Iraqi - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1%

Ivorean - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1%

Jamaican - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Liberian - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Mauritanian 1 3% - - - - - - 1 0%

Moroccan - - - - 1 2% 2 1% 3 1%

Nepalese - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Nigerian
3

(3’)
10%

13

(1)
27%

7

(3)
15%

6

(5’)
4% 29 11% 3

Nigerien - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Pakistani - - - - - - 3 2% 3 1%

Polish - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1%

Portuguese - - - - - - 4 3% 4 2%

Romanian - -
8

(2)
16% 1 2%

44

(1)
32% 53 20% 1

Russian - - 1 2% - - - - 1 0%

Rwandan - - 1 2% - - - - 1 0%

Sierra	Leonean 1 3% 1 2%
6

(4)
13% 4 3% 12 5% *

Somali - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Sri	Lankan - - 1 2% - - - - 1 0%

Sudanese - - - - 1 2% - - 1 0%

Surinamese - - - - 1 2% 2 1% 3 1%

Tanzanian - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Togolese - - 1 2% - - - - 1 0%

Continued Table B3.6



172
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Nationality	of	
male	victims 2006 2007 2008 2009

Total	
2006-2009 Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % R

Turkish
3

(3’)
10% - - - - - - 3 1%

Ugandan - - 1 2% - - 1 1% 2 1%

Ukrainian - - 2 4% - - - - 2 1%

Vietnamese - - - - 1 2% - - 1 0%

Yugoslavian - - 1 2% - - - - 1 0%

Zimbabwean - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0%

Unknown 1 3% - - - - - - 1 0%

Total 30 100% 49 100% 46 100% 138 100% 263 100%

Source: STV/CoMensha databases
Dark blue shading: This nationality was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this nationality was in the top 5 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*  Is not in the top 5 overall, but five or more of the male victims reported to CoMensha in at least one of the years  

(2006-2009) had this nationality.
**  Is not in the top 5 overall, but ten or more of the male victims reported to CoMensha in at least one of the years  

(2006-2009) had this nationality.

Continued Table B3.6



173
Additional tables

Table B3.7  Percentage of underage victims among Dutch, Nigerian and other non-Dutch victims 
reported to CoMensha (2006-2009)6

2006 2007 2008 2009
Total	

2006-2009

N % N % N % N % N %

Dutch	victims
-	of	whom	underage	

146
35

100%
24%

270
100

100%
37%

320
104

100%
33%

240
63

100%
26%

976
302

100%
31%

Nigerian	victims
-	of	whom	underage

86
32

100%
37%

104
50

100%
48%

64
7

100%
11%

101
10

100%
10%

355
99

100%
28%

Other	non-Dutch	
victims
-	of	whom	underage

312

34

100%

11%

340

49

100%

14%

436

58

100%

13%

551

38

100%

7%

1699

181

100%

11%

Victims	of	unknown	
nationality
-	of	whom	underage

35

2

100%

6%

2

0

100%

0%

6

0

100%

0%

17

0

100%

0%

60

2

100%

3%

Total
-	of	whom	underage

579
103

100%
18%

716
199

100%
28%

826
169

100%
20%

909
111

100%
12%

3030
582

100%
19%

Source: STV/CoMensha databases

6 From 2006, a relationship can be established between age and nationality.



174
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.8 Sectors in which victims were exploited (2007-2009)7

sex industry8, N. a.9

Exploitation Sector 2007 2008 2009 Total	2007-2009

F M Unknown Total F M Unknown Total F M Unknown Total

N N N N % N N N N % N N N N % N %

Exploitation		
in	the	sex	industry8

329 (+4) 9 (+1) - 338 47% 465 (+2) 7 1 473 57% 394 (+2) 24 (+2) 1 419 46% 1230 50%

Exploitation		
in	sectors	other		
than	the	sex	industry

Agriculture	and	horticulture - - - - - 1 - - 1 0% 25 31 - 56 6% 57 2%

Au	pair 1 - - 1 0% 1 - - 1 0% 1 - - 1 0% 3 0%

Cleaning 1 - - 1 0% 2 1 - 3 0% 1 - - 1 0% 5 0%

Construction - 3 - 3 0% - - - - - - 14 - 14 2% 17 1%

Domestic	work 12 (+1) - - 12 2% 6 - - 6 1% 11 (+1) 4 - 15 2% 33 1%

Drug	dealing - - - - - 4 1 - 5 1% 5 3 - 8 1% 13 1%

Food	industry - - - - - - - - - - 4 9 - 13 1% 13 1%

Hospitality 2 (+1) 5 1 8 1% 3 4 - 7 1 - 4 - 4 0% 19 1%

Textile	industry 1 - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Total 17 (+2) 8 1 26 4% 17 6 - 23 3% 47 (+1) 65 - 112 12% 161 7%

Exploitation,	other 6 8 - 14 2% 15 14 - 29 4% 25 23 48 5% 91 4%

Forced	organ	donation	 - 1 - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

N.	a.9 93 10 2 105 15% 50 8 - 58 7% 83 7 - 90 10% 253 10%

Unknown 219 13 - 232 32% 232 11 - 243 29% 221 19 - 240 26% 715 29%

Total 664 49 3 716 100% 779 46 1 826 100% 770 138 1 909 100% 2451 100%

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases

7 Since 2007, BNRM has had access to information about the sectors in which the reported victims were 
exploited. Note: some victims were exploited in more than one sector, but in order to bring the totals to 
100% these victims are only recorded under one sector. The other sectors in which they were exploited 
are shown between brackets under those sectors. 

8 Such as: brothel/club, escort, internet (one female victim in 2009), massage parlour, private home, 
window prostitution, street prostitution.

9 If the victim has not yet worked.



175
Additional tables

Table B3.8 Sectors in which victims were exploited (2007-2009)7

sex industry8, N. a.9

Exploitation Sector 2007 2008 2009 Total	2007-2009

F M Unknown Total F M Unknown Total F M Unknown Total

N N N N % N N N N % N N N N % N %

Exploitation		
in	the	sex	industry8

329 (+4) 9 (+1) - 338 47% 465 (+2) 7 1 473 57% 394 (+2) 24 (+2) 1 419 46% 1230 50%

Exploitation		
in	sectors	other		
than	the	sex	industry

Agriculture	and	horticulture - - - - - 1 - - 1 0% 25 31 - 56 6% 57 2%

Au	pair 1 - - 1 0% 1 - - 1 0% 1 - - 1 0% 3 0%

Cleaning 1 - - 1 0% 2 1 - 3 0% 1 - - 1 0% 5 0%

Construction - 3 - 3 0% - - - - - - 14 - 14 2% 17 1%

Domestic	work 12 (+1) - - 12 2% 6 - - 6 1% 11 (+1) 4 - 15 2% 33 1%

Drug	dealing - - - - - 4 1 - 5 1% 5 3 - 8 1% 13 1%

Food	industry - - - - - - - - - - 4 9 - 13 1% 13 1%

Hospitality 2 (+1) 5 1 8 1% 3 4 - 7 1 - 4 - 4 0% 19 1%

Textile	industry 1 - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Total 17 (+2) 8 1 26 4% 17 6 - 23 3% 47 (+1) 65 - 112 12% 161 7%

Exploitation,	other 6 8 - 14 2% 15 14 - 29 4% 25 23 48 5% 91 4%

Forced	organ	donation	 - 1 - 1 0% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

N.	a.9 93 10 2 105 15% 50 8 - 58 7% 83 7 - 90 10% 253 10%

Unknown 219 13 - 232 32% 232 11 - 243 29% 221 19 - 240 26% 715 29%

Total 664 49 3 716 100% 779 46 1 826 100% 770 138 1 909 100% 2451 100%

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases

7 Since 2007, BNRM has had access to information about the sectors in which the reported victims were 
exploited. Note: some victims were exploited in more than one sector, but in order to bring the totals to 
100% these victims are only recorded under one sector. The other sectors in which they were exploited 
are shown between brackets under those sectors. 

8 Such as: brothel/club, escort, internet (one female victim in 2009), massage parlour, private home, 
window prostitution, street prostitution.

9 If the victim has not yet worked.



176
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.9 Notifiers (2001-2009)10

field work11, Individuals12, social services13, human trafficking14

Notifiers 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Health	care	/	field	work11 3 1% 5 1% 4 2% 3 1% 5 1% 3 1% - - - - - - 23 0%

IND - - - - - - - - - - 15 3% 5 1% 4 0% - - 24 0%

Individuals12 18 6% 36 10% 23 9% 23 6% - - 20 3% 15 2% 10 1% 18 2% 163 3%

Legal	/	social	services13 11 4% 13 4% 3 1% 22 5% 10 2% 16 3% 27 4% 55 7% 19 2% 176 4%

Networks	for	victims	of	human	
trafficking14

- - - - - - - - - - 104 18% 144 20% 136 16% 160 17% 544 11% 2

Police15 135 48% 193 56% 153 60% 192 47% 218 51% 310 54% 385 54% 493 60% 573 61% 2652 55% 1

Refugee	/	asylum	worker16 17 6% 25 7% 17 7% 12 3% 19 4% 8 1% 6 1% 9 1% 4 0% 117 2%

Royal	Netherlands	Marechaussee17 - - - - - - - - - - 56 10% 23 3% 15 2% 32 3% 126 3%

Shelters18 23 8% 24 7% 20 8% 49 12% 75 18% 21 4% 20 3% 22 3% 7 1% 261 5% 3

SIOD19 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 48 5% 48 1%

Victim	personally 6 2% 11 3% 3 1% 12 3% 12 3% 7 1% 3 0% 2 0% 2 0% 58 1%

Victim	support	organisation20 8 3% 11 3% 10 4% 18 4% 2 0% 9 2% 9 1% 2 0% 1 0% 70 1%

Youth	care	services21 12 4% 10 3% 6 2% 14 3% 6 1% 8 1% 81 11% 72 9% 11 1% 220 5% 5

Other	organisations22 3 1% 15 4% 18 7% 60 15% 40 9% - - 24 3% 22 3% 58 6% 240 5% 4

Unknown	/	anonymous 48 17% - - - - - - 37 9% 2 0% - - - - - - 87 2%

Total 284 100% 343 100% 257 100% 405 100% 424 100% 579 100% 742 100% 842 100% 933 100% 4809 100%

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases

10 CoMensha has registered notifiers since 2001. From 2007, the total number of notifications in a year no 
longer corresponds with the total number of reported victims in that year (2007: 742 compared with 716, 
2008: 842 compared with 826, 2009: 933 compared with 909). The reason for this is that some victims are 
reported to CoMensha by different individuals or agencies and since 2007 CoMensha has registered all of 
the various notifiers.

11 Institutions (municipal health services, doctors, hospital staff ) who provide medical care and information 
to prostitutes in the workplace or at the surgery.

12 They could be family, friends or a partner of the victim. Notifications sometimes come from a client (STV 
Annual Report, 2006).

13 The category ‘social services’ was introduced (without specification) in the STV annual report for 2004. Pre-
viously, the category ‘legal services’ had been used (Legal Aid office, pro bono lawyers, victim support offices 
and lawyers). Both categories were used in the STV annual report for 2006 and in the CoMensha annual report 
for 2007. In 2008 and 2009 there were separate categories for ‘social services’ and ‘lawyers’. For the purposes 
of comparability, the categories (‘social services, ‘legal services’ and ‘lawyers’) are merged in the table.

14 The networks for victims of human trafficking were established by CoMensha to provide integrated as-
sistance for victims. The networks are supervised by a care coordinator, or by CoMensha if there is no 
coordinator. Before 2006, the few notifications by the networks were included in the category ‘shelters’.



177
Additional tables

Police15, asylum worker16, Marechaussee17, Shelters18, SIOD19, support organisation20, care services21, 
Other organisations22

15 This category covers every police service that could be confronted with human trafficking.
16 These are professional groups that work in reporting centres, reception centres and asylum-seeker 

centres, such as refugeeworkers (Vluchtelingenwerk), but also counsellors and medical staff, the COA 
and the Deportation Holding Centre (Grenshospitium).

17 In 2006, the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee (KMar) reported victims for the first time. Those noti-
fications were the result of the activities of the ‘Sluis’ team that intercepts possible victims of human 
trafficking at Schiphol.

18 Including facilities for public and women’s shelters and religious, private or local initiatives.
19  In 2009, victims were reported for the first  time by the Social Intelligence and Investigation Service 

(SIOD) following working agreements made by CoMensha with the SIOD at the beginning of 2009 
(CoMensha Annual Report, 2009).

20 General Social Work (including addiction treatment) and Prostitution Social Work.
21 Child Protection Council, Youth Care Agency offices and the guardianship service of Stichting NIDOS.
22 Including the International Organisation for Migration (IOM), from which eight notifications were 

received in 2009.

Table B3.9 Notifiers (2001-2009)10

field work11, Individuals12, social services13, human trafficking14

Notifiers 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Health	care	/	field	work11 3 1% 5 1% 4 2% 3 1% 5 1% 3 1% - - - - - - 23 0%

IND - - - - - - - - - - 15 3% 5 1% 4 0% - - 24 0%

Individuals12 18 6% 36 10% 23 9% 23 6% - - 20 3% 15 2% 10 1% 18 2% 163 3%

Legal	/	social	services13 11 4% 13 4% 3 1% 22 5% 10 2% 16 3% 27 4% 55 7% 19 2% 176 4%

Networks	for	victims	of	human	
trafficking14

- - - - - - - - - - 104 18% 144 20% 136 16% 160 17% 544 11% 2

Police15 135 48% 193 56% 153 60% 192 47% 218 51% 310 54% 385 54% 493 60% 573 61% 2652 55% 1

Refugee	/	asylum	worker16 17 6% 25 7% 17 7% 12 3% 19 4% 8 1% 6 1% 9 1% 4 0% 117 2%

Royal	Netherlands	Marechaussee17 - - - - - - - - - - 56 10% 23 3% 15 2% 32 3% 126 3%

Shelters18 23 8% 24 7% 20 8% 49 12% 75 18% 21 4% 20 3% 22 3% 7 1% 261 5% 3

SIOD19 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 48 5% 48 1%

Victim	personally 6 2% 11 3% 3 1% 12 3% 12 3% 7 1% 3 0% 2 0% 2 0% 58 1%

Victim	support	organisation20 8 3% 11 3% 10 4% 18 4% 2 0% 9 2% 9 1% 2 0% 1 0% 70 1%

Youth	care	services21 12 4% 10 3% 6 2% 14 3% 6 1% 8 1% 81 11% 72 9% 11 1% 220 5% 5

Other	organisations22 3 1% 15 4% 18 7% 60 15% 40 9% - - 24 3% 22 3% 58 6% 240 5% 4

Unknown	/	anonymous 48 17% - - - - - - 37 9% 2 0% - - - - - - 87 2%

Total 284 100% 343 100% 257 100% 405 100% 424 100% 579 100% 742 100% 842 100% 933 100% 4809 100%

Source: STV/CoMensha: annual reports and databases

10 CoMensha has registered notifiers since 2001. From 2007, the total number of notifications in a year no 
longer corresponds with the total number of reported victims in that year (2007: 742 compared with 716, 
2008: 842 compared with 826, 2009: 933 compared with 909). The reason for this is that some victims are 
reported to CoMensha by different individuals or agencies and since 2007 CoMensha has registered all of 
the various notifiers.

11 Institutions (municipal health services, doctors, hospital staff ) who provide medical care and information 
to prostitutes in the workplace or at the surgery.

12 They could be family, friends or a partner of the victim. Notifications sometimes come from a client (STV 
Annual Report, 2006).

13 The category ‘social services’ was introduced (without specification) in the STV annual report for 2004. Pre-
viously, the category ‘legal services’ had been used (Legal Aid office, pro bono lawyers, victim support offices 
and lawyers). Both categories were used in the STV annual report for 2006 and in the CoMensha annual report 
for 2007. In 2008 and 2009 there were separate categories for ‘social services’ and ‘lawyers’. For the purposes 
of comparability, the categories (‘social services, ‘legal services’ and ‘lawyers’) are merged in the table.

14 The networks for victims of human trafficking were established by CoMensha to provide integrated as-
sistance for victims. The networks are supervised by a care coordinator, or by CoMensha if there is no 
coordinator. Before 2006, the few notifications by the networks were included in the category ‘shelters’.



178
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.10 Purpose of notification by notifier (2009)
59723, 12824, 20825

Notifiers Registration
Registration,	

Information	&	Advice
Registration,	

Shelter Total

N % N % N % N %

Individual 10 2% 6 5% 2 1% 18 2%

Legal	/	social	services	 2 0% 12 10% 5 2% 19 2%

Networks	for	victims	of	
human	trafficking

118 20% 20 17% 22 11% 160 18%

Police 354 60% 66 57% 153 74% 573 63%

Refugee	/	asylum	worker 1 0% 3 3% 0 0% 4 0%

Royal	Netherlands	
Marechaussee

9 2% 5 4% 18 9% 32 4%

Shelter 3 1% 4 3% 0 0% 7 1%

SIOD 42 7% 1 1% 5 2% 48 5%

Victim	personally 1 0% 1 1% 0 0% 2 0%

Victim	support	
organisation

0 0% 1 1% 0 0% 1 0%

Youth	care	institution	 4 1% 5 4% 2 1% 11 1%

Other	organisations 53 9% 4 3% 1 0% 58 6%

Total 59723 100% 12824 100% 20825 100% 933 100%

Source: CoMensha databases 2009

23 These 597 notifications concern 593 different reported victims (one victim was reported both by ‘police’ 
and by ‘legal/social services’, two victims were reported both by ‘police’ and by ‘networks for victims 
of human trafficking’ and one victim was reported both by ‘police’ and by ‘shelter’).

24 These 128 notifications concern 115 different reported victims (two victims were reported both by 
‘ police’ and by ‘legal /social services’, five victims were reported both by ‘police’ and by ‘networks of 
victims of human trafficking’, two victims were reported both by ‘police’ and by ‘shelter’, two victims 
were reported both by ‘police’ and by ‘other organisations’, one victim was reported both by ‘police’ 
and by ‘individual’ and one victims was reported both by ‘Royal Netherlands Marechaussee’ and by 
‘networks for victims of human trafficking’).

25 These 208 notifications concern 201 different reported victims (one victim was reported both by ‘police’ 
and by ‘legal/social services’, four victims were reported both by ‘police’ and by ‘networks for victims 
of human trafficking’ and one victim was reported by both ‘police’, by ‘networks for victims of human 
trafficking’ and by ‘legal/social services’).



179
Additional tables

Supplement	to	§	3.3.2	Victims	and	the	B9	regulation
Tables B3.11 to B3.17 provide a complete overview of the available data on the applications made to the 
IND for B9 residence permits and the B9 permits granted by the IND in the last decade. See § 3.3.2 for a 
description of the research method and Appendix 2 for explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix 
and the applicable statistics.

Table B3.11 Number of B9 applications (2000-2009)
23726

Number	of		
B9	applications	(N)

Index		
figure	(2000=1.0)

Percentage	growth	compared		
with	the	preceding	year

2000 77 1.0 -

2001 145 1.9 88%

2002 160 2.1 10%

2005 77 1.0 -

2006 180 2.3 134%

2007 186 2.4 3%

2008 23726 3.0 27%

2009 299 3.9 26%

Total 1361 n. a. n. a.

Source: IND databases

26 In NRM7, the number was incorrectly reported as 443.



180
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.12 Number of B9 awards (2000-2009)

Number		
of	B9	awards	(N)

Index		
figure	(2000=1.0)

Percentage	growth	compared		
with	the	preceding	year

2000 55 1.0 -

2001 122 2.2 122%

2002 127 2.3 4%

2005 61 1.1 -

2006 150 2.7 146%

2007 143 2.6 -5%

2008 235 4.3 64%

2009 280 5.1 19%

Total 1173 n. a. n.a.

Source: IND databases

Table B3.13 Gender of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
Female27

Female27 Male

% %

2000 98% 2%

2001 97% 3%

2002 97% 3%

2005 98% 2%

2006 89% 11%

2007 90% 10%

2008 89% 11%

2009 81% 19%

Source: IND databases

27 For the period 2000-2002, it was not been established with certainty whether all victims were women.



181
Additional tables

Table B3.14 Age of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
12628, 117229

0-10	 11-17	 18-25	 26-30	 31-40	 41	and	over Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

2000 1 2% 6 11% 34 62% 12 22% 2 4% - - 55 100%

2001 2 2% 9 7% 75 62% 20 16% 14 12% 2 2% 122 100%

2002 1 1% 12 10% 86 68% 18 14% 7 6% 2 2% 12628 100%

2005 - - 5 8% 29 48% 18 30% 8 13% 1 2% 61 100%

2006 - - 27 18% 70 47% 23 15% 24 16% 6 4% 150 100%

2007 - - 17 12% 70 49% 27 19% 25 18% 4 3% 143 100%

2008 1 0% 17 7% 120 51% 33 14% 49 21% 15 6% 235 100%

2009 - - 12 4% 135 48% 69 25% 51 18% 13 5% 280 100%

Total 5 0% 105 9% 619 53% 220 19% 180 15% 43 4% 117229 100%

Source: IND databases

28 The age of one victim is not known.
29 The age of one victim who was granted a B9 residence permit in 2002 is not known.



182
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.15 Nationality of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Albanian 1 2% 1 1% 4 3% 1 2% 1 1% - - - - 1 0% 9 1%

Angolan - - 1 1% 2 2% - - 2 1% - - - - 1 0% 6 1%

Armenian - - - - - - 1 2% 2 1% 1 1% 2 1% 3 1% 9 1%

Azerbaijani - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1% 4 0%

Belarussian 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 1 2% - - - - 1 0% 2 1% 7 1%

Belgian - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Bengali - - - - - - - - 2 1% - - - - - - 2 0%

Beninean - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Bolivian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Bosnian - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Brazilian - - - - - - - - 1 1% 4 3% 4 2% 8 3% 17 1% *

British - - - - - - 1 2% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Bulgarian 7 (2) 13%
33

(1)
27%

35

(1)
28%

11

(1)
18%

18

(3)
12%

10

(4)
7% 8 3% 6 2% 128 11% 2

Burundian - - - - - - 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% - - 1 0% 4 0%

Cameroonian 1 2% 2 2% 5 4% - - 2 1% 4 3% 10 4% 5 2% 29 2% 10

Cape	Verdean - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Central	African - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Chinese - - 2 2% 2 2% 1 2%
9

(5)
6%

16

(3)
11%

42

(2)
18%

24

(3)
9% 96 8% 3

Congolese	(Zairean) - - - - - - - - 2 1% - - 2 1% 3 1% 7 1%

Croatian - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Czech
4

(5)
7%

7

(5)
6% 3 2% 2 3% 3 2% - - 1 0% 1 0% 21 2% *

Dominican - - - - - - 1 2% 1 1% - - 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Estonian 2 4% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 4 0%

Ethiopian - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Finnish 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

French - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 1% - - 3 0%

Gambian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 2 0%

Georgian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

German 1 2% 1 1% - - - - - - 2 1% - - - - 4 0%

Ghanaian - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% 7 3%
18

(4’)
6% 28 2% **



183
Additional tables

Table B3.15 Nationality of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Albanian 1 2% 1 1% 4 3% 1 2% 1 1% - - - - 1 0% 9 1%

Angolan - - 1 1% 2 2% - - 2 1% - - - - 1 0% 6 1%

Armenian - - - - - - 1 2% 2 1% 1 1% 2 1% 3 1% 9 1%

Azerbaijani - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1% 4 0%

Belarussian 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 1 2% - - - - 1 0% 2 1% 7 1%

Belgian - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Bengali - - - - - - - - 2 1% - - - - - - 2 0%

Beninean - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Bolivian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Bosnian - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Brazilian - - - - - - - - 1 1% 4 3% 4 2% 8 3% 17 1% *

British - - - - - - 1 2% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Bulgarian 7 (2) 13%
33

(1)
27%

35

(1)
28%

11

(1)
18%

18

(3)
12%

10

(4)
7% 8 3% 6 2% 128 11% 2

Burundian - - - - - - 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% - - 1 0% 4 0%

Cameroonian 1 2% 2 2% 5 4% - - 2 1% 4 3% 10 4% 5 2% 29 2% 10

Cape	Verdean - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Central	African - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Chinese - - 2 2% 2 2% 1 2%
9

(5)
6%

16

(3)
11%

42

(2)
18%

24

(3)
9% 96 8% 3

Congolese	(Zairean) - - - - - - - - 2 1% - - 2 1% 3 1% 7 1%

Croatian - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Czech
4

(5)
7%

7

(5)
6% 3 2% 2 3% 3 2% - - 1 0% 1 0% 21 2% *

Dominican - - - - - - 1 2% 1 1% - - 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Estonian 2 4% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 4 0%

Ethiopian - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Finnish 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

French - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 1% - - 3 0%

Gambian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 2 0%

Georgian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

German 1 2% 1 1% - - - - - - 2 1% - - - - 4 0%

Ghanaian - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% 7 3%
18

(4’)
6% 28 2% **



184
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Guinean - - 3 2% 1 1% - - 3 2% 5 4%
14

(4)
6%

18

(4’)
6% 44 4% 6’

Hungarian - - 2 2% - - 1 2% 2 1% 4 3%
11

(5)
5% 10 4% 30 3% 9

Indian - - - - - - - - 3 2% - - 6 3% 4 1% 13 1% *

Indonesian - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 5 2% 6 1% *

Iranian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 2 1% 3 0%

Iraqi - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Italian - - 1 1% - - 1 2% - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Ivorian 1 2% - - - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Jamaican - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Kenyan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Kirgizian - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Latvian - - 1 1% - - 1 2% 1 1% - - - - 6 2% 9 1% *

Lebanese - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Liberian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0% 2 1% 4 0%

Lithuanian 3 5% 1 1% 5 4% - - - - 1 1% 1 0% 1 0% 12 1% *

Malaysian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Mauritanian - - - - - - - - 1 1% 2 1% - - - - 3 0%

Moldavian 1 2% 5 4%
12

(4)
9% - - 3 2% - - - - - - 21 2% **

Mongolian - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1% 4 0%

Moroccan 2 4% - - - - 1 2% 1 1%
6

(5)
4% 2 1% 9 3% 21 2% *

Namibian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Nepalese - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Nigerian
9

(1)
16%

9

(4)
7%

14

(3)
11%

4

(5)
7%

33

(1)
22%

34

(1)
24%

54

(1)
23%

54

(1)
19% 211 18% 1

Nigerien - - - - - - 1 2% - - 1 1% 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Norwegian - - - - - - 1 2% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Noth	Korean - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Pakistani - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Philippine - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 1% - - 3 0%

Polish 1 2% 3 2% 2 2% 3 5% 2 1% 5 4% - - 1 0% 17 1% *

Continued table B3.15



185
Additional tables

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Guinean - - 3 2% 1 1% - - 3 2% 5 4%
14

(4)
6%

18

(4’)
6% 44 4% 6’

Hungarian - - 2 2% - - 1 2% 2 1% 4 3%
11

(5)
5% 10 4% 30 3% 9

Indian - - - - - - - - 3 2% - - 6 3% 4 1% 13 1% *

Indonesian - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 5 2% 6 1% *

Iranian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 2 1% 3 0%

Iraqi - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Italian - - 1 1% - - 1 2% - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Ivorian 1 2% - - - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Jamaican - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Kenyan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Kirgizian - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Latvian - - 1 1% - - 1 2% 1 1% - - - - 6 2% 9 1% *

Lebanese - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Liberian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0% 2 1% 4 0%

Lithuanian 3 5% 1 1% 5 4% - - - - 1 1% 1 0% 1 0% 12 1% *

Malaysian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Mauritanian - - - - - - - - 1 1% 2 1% - - - - 3 0%

Moldavian 1 2% 5 4%
12

(4)
9% - - 3 2% - - - - - - 21 2% **

Mongolian - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 2 1% 4 0%

Moroccan 2 4% - - - - 1 2% 1 1%
6

(5)
4% 2 1% 9 3% 21 2% *

Namibian - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Nepalese - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Nigerian
9

(1)
16%

9

(4)
7%

14

(3)
11%

4

(5)
7%

33

(1)
22%

34

(1)
24%

54

(1)
23%

54

(1)
19% 211 18% 1

Nigerien - - - - - - 1 2% - - 1 1% 1 0% 1 0% 4 0%

Norwegian - - - - - - 1 2% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Noth	Korean - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Pakistani - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Philippine - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 1% - - 3 0%

Polish 1 2% 3 2% 2 2% 3 5% 2 1% 5 4% - - 1 0% 17 1% *



186
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Romanian
6

(3’)
11% 4 3%

15

(2)
12%

6

(3)
10%

24

(2)
16% 5 4% 3 1% 13 5% 76 6% 5

Russian
(Soviet	Russian)

6

(3’)
11%

16

(2’)
13%

6

(5’)
5%

5

(4)
8% 3 2% 4 3% 2 1% 3 1% 45 4% 6’

Rwandan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Senegalese - - - - - - 1 2% - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Sierra	Leonean - - 1 1%
6

(5’)
5%

8

(2)
13%

10

(4)
7%

17

(2)
12%

23

(3)
10%

25

(2)
9% 90 8% 4

Slovak 2 4% 2 2% 1 1% 2 3% - - 2 1% 2 1% 1 0% 12 1%

Somali - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 4 1% 6 1%

South	African - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Sudanese 1 2% - - - - - - 3 2% - - - - 3 1% 7 1%

Surinamese - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 3 1% 5 0%

Taiwanese - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 2 1% 4 0%

Tanzanian - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Thai - - - - - - 1 2% 1 1% 3 2% 4 2% 3 1% 12 1%

Togolese - - - - 1 1% 1 1% 2 1% - - 4 1% 8 1%

Tunisian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Turkish - - 1 1% - - - - - - 2 1% 1 0% - - 4 0%

Ugandan - - 1 1% 2 2% 1 2% 1 1% - - 3 1% 3 1% 11 1%

Ukrainian 3 5%
16

(2’)
13% 4 3% 1 2% 4 3% 1 1% 2 1% 3 1% 34 3% 8

Uzbeki - - - - 1 1% 2 3% - - - - - - 1 0% 4 0%

Vietnamese - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 2 0%

Yugoslavian 1 2% 2 2% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% 2 1% 1 0% 8 1%

Zimbabwean - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Unknown 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 7 3% 2 1% 15 1%

Stateless - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Total 55 100% 122 100% 127 100% 61 100% 150 100% 143 100% 235 100% 280 100% 1173 100%

Source: IND databases
Dark blue shading: This nationality was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this nationality was in the top 10 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*  Is not in the top 10 overall, but five or more victims who were granted B9 status had this nationality in at least one of the 

years (2000-2009).
**  Is not in the top 10 overall, but ten or more victims who were granted B9 status had this nationality in at least one of the 

years (2000-2009).

Continued Table B3.15



187
Additional tables

Nationality 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Romanian
6

(3’)
11% 4 3%

15

(2)
12%

6

(3)
10%

24

(2)
16% 5 4% 3 1% 13 5% 76 6% 5

Russian
(Soviet	Russian)

6

(3’)
11%

16

(2’)
13%

6

(5’)
5%

5

(4)
8% 3 2% 4 3% 2 1% 3 1% 45 4% 6’

Rwandan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Senegalese - - - - - - 1 2% - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Sierra	Leonean - - 1 1%
6

(5’)
5%

8

(2)
13%

10

(4)
7%

17

(2)
12%

23

(3)
10%

25

(2)
9% 90 8% 4

Slovak 2 4% 2 2% 1 1% 2 3% - - 2 1% 2 1% 1 0% 12 1%

Somali - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 4 1% 6 1%

South	African - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Sudanese 1 2% - - - - - - 3 2% - - - - 3 1% 7 1%

Surinamese - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 3 1% 5 0%

Taiwanese - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 2 1% 4 0%

Tanzanian - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Thai - - - - - - 1 2% 1 1% 3 2% 4 2% 3 1% 12 1%

Togolese - - - - 1 1% 1 1% 2 1% - - 4 1% 8 1%

Tunisian - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Turkish - - 1 1% - - - - - - 2 1% 1 0% - - 4 0%

Ugandan - - 1 1% 2 2% 1 2% 1 1% - - 3 1% 3 1% 11 1%

Ukrainian 3 5%
16

(2’)
13% 4 3% 1 2% 4 3% 1 1% 2 1% 3 1% 34 3% 8

Uzbeki - - - - 1 1% 2 3% - - - - - - 1 0% 4 0%

Vietnamese - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 2 0%

Yugoslavian 1 2% 2 2% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% 2 1% 1 0% 8 1%

Zimbabwean - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Unknown 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 7 3% 2 1% 15 1%

Stateless - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Total 55 100% 122 100% 127 100% 61 100% 150 100% 143 100% 235 100% 280 100% 1173 100%

Source: IND databases
Dark blue shading: This nationality was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this nationality was in the top 10 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*  Is not in the top 10 overall, but five or more victims who were granted B9 status had this nationality in at least one of the 

years (2000-2009).
**  Is not in the top 10 overall, but ten or more victims who were granted B9 status had this nationality in at least one of the 

years (2000-2009).



188
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.16 Region of origin of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
EU: 199530, EU: new member states31, Non-EU Eastern Europe32, Non-EU Western Europe33

Region	of	origin 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

EU:	199530

40 73% 100 82% 92 72%

2 3% - - 2 1% 1 0% - -

460 39%
EU:	new	member	states31 26 43% 51 34% 27 19% 26 11% 39 14%

Non-EU	Eastern	Europe32 10 16% 12 8% 8 6% 10 4% 13 5%

Non-EU	Western	Europe33 1 2% - - - - - - - -

Africa 14 25% 16 13% 31 24% 17 28% 60 40% 74 52% 110 47% 160 57% 482 41%

Latin	America	&	the	Carribean	 - - - - - - 1 2% 2 1% 5 3% 6 3% 13 5% 27 2%

Asia - - 5 4% 3 2% 3 5% 23 15% 26 18% 75 32% 53 19% 188 16%

Unknown/stateless 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 1 2% 2 1% 1 1% 7 3% 2 1% 16 1%

Total 55 100% 122 100% 127 100% 61 100% 150 100% 143 100% 235 100% 280 100% 1173 100%

Source: IND databases

30 EU member states since 1995: Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Germany, Den-
mark, Ireland, Greece, United Kingdom, Portugal, Spain, Finland, Austria and Sweden.

31 EU member states since 2004: Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovenia, 
Slovakia, Czech Republic, and since 2007: Bulgaria and Romania.

32 Non EU countries in Eastern Europe: Russia, Moldavia, Ukraine, Belarus, Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Serbia, Macedonia, Croatia, Montenegro, Kazakhstan, Turkey, Kirgizia, Azerbaijan.

33 Non-EU countries in Western Europe: Switzerland, Norway, Iceland, Isle of Man, the Faeroe Islands, 
Andorra, Gibraltar, Vatican City, San Marino, Liechtenstein, Monaco.



189
Additional tables

Table B3.16 Region of origin of victims granted B9 status (2000-2009)
EU: 199530, EU: new member states31, Non-EU Eastern Europe32, Non-EU Western Europe33

Region	of	origin 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

EU:	199530

40 73% 100 82% 92 72%

2 3% - - 2 1% 1 0% - -

460 39%
EU:	new	member	states31 26 43% 51 34% 27 19% 26 11% 39 14%

Non-EU	Eastern	Europe32 10 16% 12 8% 8 6% 10 4% 13 5%

Non-EU	Western	Europe33 1 2% - - - - - - - -

Africa 14 25% 16 13% 31 24% 17 28% 60 40% 74 52% 110 47% 160 57% 482 41%

Latin	America	&	the	Carribean	 - - - - - - 1 2% 2 1% 5 3% 6 3% 13 5% 27 2%

Asia - - 5 4% 3 2% 3 5% 23 15% 26 18% 75 32% 53 19% 188 16%

Unknown/stateless 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 1 2% 2 1% 1 1% 7 3% 2 1% 16 1%

Total 55 100% 122 100% 127 100% 61 100% 150 100% 143 100% 235 100% 280 100% 1173 100%

Source: IND databases

30 EU member states since 1995: Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Germany, Den-
mark, Ireland, Greece, United Kingdom, Portugal, Spain, Finland, Austria and Sweden.

31 EU member states since 2004: Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovenia, 
Slovakia, Czech Republic, and since 2007: Bulgaria and Romania.

32 Non EU countries in Eastern Europe: Russia, Moldavia, Ukraine, Belarus, Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, 
Serbia, Macedonia, Croatia, Montenegro, Kazakhstan, Turkey, Kirgizia, Azerbaijan.

33 Non-EU countries in Western Europe: Switzerland, Norway, Iceland, Isle of Man, the Faeroe Islands, 
Andorra, Gibraltar, Vatican City, San Marino, Liechtenstein, Monaco.



190
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B.3.17 Police region from which successful B9 applications were made (2000-2009)

Police	region 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Amsterdam-Amstelland 11 20% 13 11% 25 20% 6 10% 23 15% 16 11% 21 9% 15 5% 130 11% 2

Brabant-Noord 1 2% - - 2 2% - - 2 1% 2 1% 2 1% 5 2% 14 1%

Brabant-Zuid-Oost 4 7% 2 2% 1 1% 2 3% 8 5% 8 6% 8 3% 15 5% 48 4%

Drenthe 5 9% 6 5% 1 1% 2 3% 3 2% 2 1% 4 2% 4 1% 27 2%

Flevoland - - - - 5 4% 2 3% 2 1% 1 1% 3 1% 3 1% 16 1%

Friesland - - 8 7% 8 6% 8 13% 4 3% 5 3% 7 3% 20 7% 60 5%

Gelderland-Midden 1 2% 7 6% 2 2% 2 3% 2 1% 1 1% 6 3% 11 4% 32 3%

Gelderland-Zuid 1 2% 3 2% 2 2% - - 2 1% 2 1% 4 2% 3 1% 17 1%

Gooi	en	Vechtstreek - - 2 2% 2 2% 1 2% - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Groningen 6 11% 16 13% 13 10% 3 5% 8 5% 12 8% 19 8% 27 10% 104 9% 4

Haaglanden 5 9% 9 7% 10 8% 2 3% 16 11% 16 11% 41 17% 33 12% 132 11% 1

Hollands	Midden 1 2% 3 2% - - 1 2% 3 2% 3 2% 3 1% 1 0% 15 1%

IJsselland - - 3 2% 6 5% 1 2% 1 1% 8 6% 4 2% 6 2% 29 2%

Kennemerland 1 2% 7 6% 5 4% 2 3% 34 23% 17 12% 31 13% 26 9% 123 10% 3

Limburg-Noord 2 4% 11 9% 1 1% - - - - 2 1% 8 3% 3 1% 27 2%

Limburg-Zuid - - 2 2% 3 2% 1 2% 2 1% 2 1% 6 3% 3 1% 19 2%

Midden-	en	West-Brabant 2 4% 3 2% 8 6% 1 2% 8 5% 4 3% 18 8% 13 5% 57 5%

Noord-	en	Oost-Gelderland 1 2% 1 1% 5 4% 4 7% 2 1% 2 1% 5 2% 4 1% 24 2%

Noord-Holland	Noord 1 2% 6 5% 6 5% - - 3 2% 4 3% 1 0% 3 1% 24 2%

Rotterdam-Rijnmond 6 11% 7 6% 5 4% 9 15% 11 7% 13 9% 14 6% 18 6% 83 7% 5

Twente - - 1 1% 3 2% 3 5% 1 1% 2 1% 1 0% - - 11 1%

Utrecht 2 4% 7 6% 1 1% 5 8% 4 3% 10 7% 13 6% 4 1% 46 4%

Zaanstreek-Waterland - - - - 2 2% 1 2% - - - - - - - - 3 0%

Zeeland - - 1 1% 4 3% - - 4 3% 1 1% - - 1 0% 11 1%

Zuid-Holland-Zuid 2 4% 2 2% 3 2% 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 1 0% 3 1% 14 1%

Unknown 3 5% 2 2% 4 3% 4 7% 6 4% 9 6% 15 6% 59 21% 102 9%

Total 55 100% 122 100% 127 100% 61 100% 150 100% 143 100% 235 100% 280 100% 1173 100%

Source: IND databases



191
Additional tables

Table B.3.17 Police region from which successful B9 applications were made (2000-2009)

Police	region 2000 2001 2002 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total Top	5

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Amsterdam-Amstelland 11 20% 13 11% 25 20% 6 10% 23 15% 16 11% 21 9% 15 5% 130 11% 2

Brabant-Noord 1 2% - - 2 2% - - 2 1% 2 1% 2 1% 5 2% 14 1%

Brabant-Zuid-Oost 4 7% 2 2% 1 1% 2 3% 8 5% 8 6% 8 3% 15 5% 48 4%

Drenthe 5 9% 6 5% 1 1% 2 3% 3 2% 2 1% 4 2% 4 1% 27 2%

Flevoland - - - - 5 4% 2 3% 2 1% 1 1% 3 1% 3 1% 16 1%

Friesland - - 8 7% 8 6% 8 13% 4 3% 5 3% 7 3% 20 7% 60 5%

Gelderland-Midden 1 2% 7 6% 2 2% 2 3% 2 1% 1 1% 6 3% 11 4% 32 3%

Gelderland-Zuid 1 2% 3 2% 2 2% - - 2 1% 2 1% 4 2% 3 1% 17 1%

Gooi	en	Vechtstreek - - 2 2% 2 2% 1 2% - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Groningen 6 11% 16 13% 13 10% 3 5% 8 5% 12 8% 19 8% 27 10% 104 9% 4

Haaglanden 5 9% 9 7% 10 8% 2 3% 16 11% 16 11% 41 17% 33 12% 132 11% 1

Hollands	Midden 1 2% 3 2% - - 1 2% 3 2% 3 2% 3 1% 1 0% 15 1%

IJsselland - - 3 2% 6 5% 1 2% 1 1% 8 6% 4 2% 6 2% 29 2%

Kennemerland 1 2% 7 6% 5 4% 2 3% 34 23% 17 12% 31 13% 26 9% 123 10% 3

Limburg-Noord 2 4% 11 9% 1 1% - - - - 2 1% 8 3% 3 1% 27 2%

Limburg-Zuid - - 2 2% 3 2% 1 2% 2 1% 2 1% 6 3% 3 1% 19 2%

Midden-	en	West-Brabant 2 4% 3 2% 8 6% 1 2% 8 5% 4 3% 18 8% 13 5% 57 5%

Noord-	en	Oost-Gelderland 1 2% 1 1% 5 4% 4 7% 2 1% 2 1% 5 2% 4 1% 24 2%

Noord-Holland	Noord 1 2% 6 5% 6 5% - - 3 2% 4 3% 1 0% 3 1% 24 2%

Rotterdam-Rijnmond 6 11% 7 6% 5 4% 9 15% 11 7% 13 9% 14 6% 18 6% 83 7% 5

Twente - - 1 1% 3 2% 3 5% 1 1% 2 1% 1 0% - - 11 1%

Utrecht 2 4% 7 6% 1 1% 5 8% 4 3% 10 7% 13 6% 4 1% 46 4%

Zaanstreek-Waterland - - - - 2 2% 1 2% - - - - - - - - 3 0%

Zeeland - - 1 1% 4 3% - - 4 3% 1 1% - - 1 0% 11 1%

Zuid-Holland-Zuid 2 4% 2 2% 3 2% 1 2% 1 1% 1 1% 1 0% 3 1% 14 1%

Unknown 3 5% 2 2% 4 3% 4 7% 6 4% 9 6% 15 6% 59 21% 102 9%

Total 55 100% 122 100% 127 100% 61 100% 150 100% 143 100% 235 100% 280 100% 1173 100%

Source: IND databases



192
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Supplement	to	§	3.3.3:	Victims	and	compensation
Tables B3.18 to B3.21 provide a complete overview of the available data from the CJIB concerning the 
compensation orders made in cases that led to convictions for at least human trafficking in the period 
2000-2009. See § 3.3.3 for an explanation of the research method and Appendix 2 for the explanatory 
notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics.

Table B3.18 Number of compensation orders made (2000-2009)
734, 835, 536, 337, 2438, 2039, 1040, 1841, 1642, 2943, 14044

Number	of	
compensation	

orders	(N)
Index	figure	
(2000=1.0)

Percentage	
growth	

compared	
with	the	

preceding	year

Number	
of	victims	

involved	(N)
Index	figure	
(2000=1.0)

Percentage	
growth	

compared	
with	the	

preceding	year

2000 5 1.0 - 734 1.0 -

2001 3 0.6 -40% 835 1.1 14%

2002 3 0.6 0% 536 0.7 -38%

2003 3 0.6 0% 337 0.4 -40%

2004 17 3.4 467% 2438 3.6 700%

2005 12 2.4 -29% 2039 2.9 -17%

2006 9 1.8 -25% 1040 1.4 -50%

2007 13 2.6 44% 1841 2.6 80%

2008 13 2.6 0% 1642 2.3 -11%

2009 18 3.6 38% 2943 4.1 81%

Total 96 n.a. n.a. 14044 n.a. n.a.

Source: CJIB (reference date: 12 May 2010)

34 4x1 victim and 1x3 victims.
35 1x1 victim, 1x3 victims and 1x4 victims.
36 2x1 victim, 1x3 victims.
37 3x1 victim.
38 13x1 victim, 2x2 victims, 1x3 victims and 1x4 victims.
39 8x1 victim, 1x2 victims, 2x3 victims and 1x4 victims.
40 8x1 victim and 1x2 victims.
41 10x1 victim, 1x2 victims and 2x3 victims.
42 11x1 victim, 1x2 victims and 1x3 victims.
43 11x1 victim, 4x2 victims, 2x3 victims and 1x4 victims.
44 17x1 victim, 10x2 victims, 11x3 victims and 4x4 victims.



193
Additional tables

Table B3.19 Compensation orders by amount of claim (2000-2009)

Amount		
claimed	(in	€)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total
N N N N N N N N N N N %

1-500 2 - - - - - - 2 2 - 6 6%

501-5000 2 1 3 3 13 6 6 9 6 11 60 63%

5001-15,000 1 2 - - 1 3 2 2 5 4 20 21%

15,001-25,000 - - - - 1 1 - - - 2 4 4%

25,001-35,000 - - - - - - 1 - - - 1 1%

more	than	35,000 - - - - 2 2 - - - 1 5 5%

Total 5 3 3 3 17 12 9 13 13 18 96 100%

Source: CJIB (reference date: 12 May 2010)

Table B3.20 Compensation orders by disposition (2000-2009)

Disposition 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total

N N N N N N N N N N N %

Payment	in	full 3 1 1 2 8 5 3 6 8 5 42 44%

Alternative	custodial	sentence 1 1 1 - 2 2 3 - 1 - 11 11%

Other 1 - - 1 - - - - - 1 3 3%

N.a.	(open) - 1 1 - 7 5 3 7 4 12 40 42%

Total 5 3 3 3 17 12 9 13 13 18 96 100%

Source: CJIB (reference date: 12 May 2010)

Table B3.21 Compensation orders by amount paid (2000-2009)

Amount		
paid	(in	€)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 Total

N N N N N N N N N N N %

0 1 1 - - 5 3 1 3 1 6 21 22%

1-500 1 - - - 4 2 - 1 1 2 11 11%

501-5000 3 2 3 3 7 4 8 8 6 9 53 55%

5001-15,000 - - - - 1 2 - 1 5 1 10 10%

15,001-25,000 - - - - - 1 - - - - 1 1%

25,001-35,000 - - - - - - - - - - - -

more	than	35,000 - - - - - - - - - - - -

Total 5 3 3 3 17 12 9 13 13 18 96 100%

Source: CJIB (reference date: 12 May 2010)



194
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Supplement	to	§	3.4.1:	Suspects	and	offenders	-	Prosecution
Tables B3.22 to B3.29 provide a complete overview of the available data from the PPS database on the 
human trafficking cases registered by the PPS and the human trafficking cases dealt with by the PPS in 
the period 2000-2008 (and occasionally including 2009). See § 3.4 for the explanation of the research me-
thod and Appendix 2 for the explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics.

Table B3.22 Number of cases/suspects registered by the PPS (2000-2009)
200945

Number	of	cases/suspects	registered	
by	PPS

Index	figure	
(2000=1.0)

Percentage	growth	compared	
with	preceding	year

2000 139 1.0 -

2001 130 0.9 -6%

2002 200 1.4 54%

2003 156 1.1 -12%

2004 220 1.6 41%

2005 138 1.0 -37%

2006 201 1.4 46%

2007 281 2.0 40%

2008 214 1.5 -24%

200945 136 1.0 -36%

Total 1815 n.v.t n.v.t

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

45 According to the Public Prosecution Service’s Annual Report 2009.



195
Additional tables

Table B3.23 Registered cases that involved underage victims (2000-2008)

Case	registered	by	PPS Cases	that	involved	underage	victims

N % N %

2000 139 100% 38 27%

2001 130 100% 27 21%

2002 200 100% 27 14%

2003 156 100% 41 26%

2004 220 100% 32 15%

2005 138 100% 36 26%

2006 201 100% 25 12%

2007 281 100% 56 20%

2008 214 100% 26 12%

Total 1679 100% 308 18%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



196
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.24 Cases registered by each district office (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Alkmaar 4 3% 4 3% 8 4%
13

(4)
8% 3 1% 5 4% 11 5% 19 7% 4 2% 71 4%

Almelo
10

(5)
7% 4 3% 7 4% 5 3% 11 5%

15

(3)
11% 9 4% 16 6% 12 6% 89 5% 9’

Amsterdam
18

(3)
13% 6 5%

25

(2)
13%

25

(1)
16%

25

(3’)
11%

11

(5’)
8%

24

(3’)
12%

37

(1)
13%

26

(2’)
12% 197 12% 1

Arnhem
23

(1)
17% 5 4%

20

(4)
10% 3 2% 15 7% 6 4% 12 6% 11 4% 10 5% 105 6% 6’

Assen - - 7 5% - - 2 1% 8 4% - - 1 0% - - 2 1% 20 1%

Breda 3 2%
11

(3)
8% 15 8%

11

(5)
7% 4 2% 1 1% - - 4 1% 2 1% 51 3%

Den	Bosch 2 1% 5 4%
33

(1)
17%

20

(2)
13%

25

(3’)
11%

19

(2)
14%

14

(5)
7% 10 4%

15

(5)
7% 143 9% 4

Dordrecht 3 2% 2 2% - - 3 2% 1 0% 1 1% - - 3 1% - - 13 1%

Groningen
13

(4)
9%

12

(2)
9% 9 5% 7 4% 11 5%

11

(5’)
8% 10 5%

22

(5)
8% 10 5% 105 6% 6’

Haarlem 4 3%
9

(5’)
7%

19

(5)
10% 6 4% 8 4% 6 4% 7 3% 14 5% 14 7% 87 5%

Leeuwarden 3 2%
9

(5’)
7% 1 1% 7 4%

27

(2)
12%

13

(4)
9% 7 3% 12 4% 10 5% 89 5% 9’

Maastricht 2 1% 5 4% - - 3 2% 1 0% 2 1% 5 2% 10 4% 5 2% 33 2%

Middelburg - - 7 5% 3 2% - - - - - - 4 2% 4 1% - - 18 1%

Roermond 4 3%
13

(1)
10% 1 1% 1 1% 6 3% - - 2 1% 2 1% 3 1% 32 2%

Rotterdam 8 6% 7 5% 4 2% 5 3% 11 5%
22

(1)
16%

33

(1)
16%

29

(4)
10%

26

(2’)
12% 145 9% 3

The	Hague
20

(2)
14% 7 5% 13 7%

18

(3)
12%

28

(1)
13% 9 7%

24

(3’)
12%

30

(2’)
11%

45

(1)
21% 194 12% 2

Utrecht 9 6% 7 5% 14 7% 9 6% 6 3% 8 6% 6 3% 20 7%
20

(4)
9% 99 6% 8

Zutphen 6 4% - - 4 2% 10 6% 9 4% 4 3% 4 2% 8 3% 4 2% 49 3%

Zwolle 7 5%
10

(4)
8%

24

(3)
12% 8 5%

21

(5)
10% 5 4%

28

(2)
14%

30

(2’)
11% 6 3% 139 8% 5

Total 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679 100% n.a.

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)
Dark blue shading: This district office was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the number).



197
Additional tables

Table B3.24 Cases registered by each district office (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total Top	10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Alkmaar 4 3% 4 3% 8 4%
13

(4)
8% 3 1% 5 4% 11 5% 19 7% 4 2% 71 4%

Almelo
10

(5)
7% 4 3% 7 4% 5 3% 11 5%

15

(3)
11% 9 4% 16 6% 12 6% 89 5% 9’

Amsterdam
18

(3)
13% 6 5%

25

(2)
13%

25

(1)
16%

25

(3’)
11%

11

(5’)
8%

24

(3’)
12%

37

(1)
13%

26

(2’)
12% 197 12% 1

Arnhem
23

(1)
17% 5 4%

20

(4)
10% 3 2% 15 7% 6 4% 12 6% 11 4% 10 5% 105 6% 6’

Assen - - 7 5% - - 2 1% 8 4% - - 1 0% - - 2 1% 20 1%

Breda 3 2%
11

(3)
8% 15 8%

11

(5)
7% 4 2% 1 1% - - 4 1% 2 1% 51 3%

Den	Bosch 2 1% 5 4%
33

(1)
17%

20

(2)
13%

25

(3’)
11%

19

(2)
14%

14

(5)
7% 10 4%

15

(5)
7% 143 9% 4

Dordrecht 3 2% 2 2% - - 3 2% 1 0% 1 1% - - 3 1% - - 13 1%

Groningen
13

(4)
9%

12

(2)
9% 9 5% 7 4% 11 5%

11

(5’)
8% 10 5%

22

(5)
8% 10 5% 105 6% 6’

Haarlem 4 3%
9

(5’)
7%

19

(5)
10% 6 4% 8 4% 6 4% 7 3% 14 5% 14 7% 87 5%

Leeuwarden 3 2%
9

(5’)
7% 1 1% 7 4%

27

(2)
12%

13

(4)
9% 7 3% 12 4% 10 5% 89 5% 9’

Maastricht 2 1% 5 4% - - 3 2% 1 0% 2 1% 5 2% 10 4% 5 2% 33 2%

Middelburg - - 7 5% 3 2% - - - - - - 4 2% 4 1% - - 18 1%

Roermond 4 3%
13

(1)
10% 1 1% 1 1% 6 3% - - 2 1% 2 1% 3 1% 32 2%

Rotterdam 8 6% 7 5% 4 2% 5 3% 11 5%
22

(1)
16%

33

(1)
16%

29

(4)
10%

26

(2’)
12% 145 9% 3

The	Hague
20

(2)
14% 7 5% 13 7%

18

(3)
12%

28

(1)
13% 9 7%

24

(3’)
12%

30

(2’)
11%

45

(1)
21% 194 12% 2

Utrecht 9 6% 7 5% 14 7% 9 6% 6 3% 8 6% 6 3% 20 7%
20

(4)
9% 99 6% 8

Zutphen 6 4% - - 4 2% 10 6% 9 4% 4 3% 4 2% 8 3% 4 2% 49 3%

Zwolle 7 5%
10

(4)
8%

24

(3)
12% 8 5%

21

(5)
10% 5 4%

28

(2)
14%

30

(2’)
11% 6 3% 139 8% 5

Total 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679 100% n.a.

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)
Dark blue shading: This district office was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the number).



198
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.25 Nature of the registered cases (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Non-
aggravated	
human	
trafficking

250ter/a	section	1 4 3% 34 26% 52 26% 31 20% 60 27% 22 16% 4 2% 2 1% 3 1% 212 13%

273a/f	section	1 - - - - - - - - - - 25 18% 60 30% 94 33% 98 46% 277 16%

Total 4 3% 34 26% 52 26% 31 20% 60 27% 47 34% 64 32% 96 34% 101 47% 489 29%

Aggravated	
human	
trafficking

250ter/a	section	2 135 97% 96 74% 148 74% 125 80% 160 73% 41 30% 27 13% 20 7% 8 4% 760 45%

250ter/a	section	3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

273a/f	section	3 - - - - - - - - - - 46 33% 107 53% 158 56% 100 47% 411 24%

273a/f	section	4 - - - - - - - - - - 4 3% 1 0% 4 1% 3 1% 12 1%

273a/f	section	5 - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 3 1% 2 1% 7 0%

273a/f	section	6 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Total 135 97% 96 74% 148 74% 125 80% 160 73% 91 66% 137 68% 185 66% 113 53% 1190 71%

Total 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.26 Registered cases by most serious offence (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Aggravated	human	trafficking	 119 86% 81 62% 131 66% 111 71% 133 60% 78 57% 111 55% 160 57% 94 44% 1018 61%

Non-aggravated	human	trafficking 3 2% 24 18% 43 22% 23 15% 43 20% 37 27% 46 23% 67 24% 83 39% 369 22%

Sexual	violence 9 6% 18 14% 14 7% 12 8% 24 11% 13 9% 36 18% 34 12% 22 10% 182 11%

Other	violence 2 1% 3 2% 7 4% 2 1% 13 6% 7 5% 3 1% 10 4% 10 5% 57 3%

Other	offfences 6 4% 4 3% 5 3% 8 5% 7 3% 3 2% 5 2% 10 4% 5 2% 53 3%

Total 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



199
Additional tables

Table B3.25 Nature of the registered cases (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Non-
aggravated	
human	
trafficking

250ter/a	section	1 4 3% 34 26% 52 26% 31 20% 60 27% 22 16% 4 2% 2 1% 3 1% 212 13%

273a/f	section	1 - - - - - - - - - - 25 18% 60 30% 94 33% 98 46% 277 16%

Total 4 3% 34 26% 52 26% 31 20% 60 27% 47 34% 64 32% 96 34% 101 47% 489 29%

Aggravated	
human	
trafficking

250ter/a	section	2 135 97% 96 74% 148 74% 125 80% 160 73% 41 30% 27 13% 20 7% 8 4% 760 45%

250ter/a	section	3 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

273a/f	section	3 - - - - - - - - - - 46 33% 107 53% 158 56% 100 47% 411 24%

273a/f	section	4 - - - - - - - - - - 4 3% 1 0% 4 1% 3 1% 12 1%

273a/f	section	5 - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 3 1% 2 1% 7 0%

273a/f	section	6 - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

Total 135 97% 96 74% 148 74% 125 80% 160 73% 91 66% 137 68% 185 66% 113 53% 1190 71%

Total 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.26 Registered cases by most serious offence (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Aggravated	human	trafficking	 119 86% 81 62% 131 66% 111 71% 133 60% 78 57% 111 55% 160 57% 94 44% 1018 61%

Non-aggravated	human	trafficking 3 2% 24 18% 43 22% 23 15% 43 20% 37 27% 46 23% 67 24% 83 39% 369 22%

Sexual	violence 9 6% 18 14% 14 7% 12 8% 24 11% 13 9% 36 18% 34 12% 22 10% 182 11%

Other	violence 2 1% 3 2% 7 4% 2 1% 13 6% 7 5% 3 1% 10 4% 10 5% 57 3%

Other	offfences 6 4% 4 3% 5 3% 8 5% 7 3% 3 2% 5 2% 10 4% 5 2% 53 3%

Total 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



200
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.27 Registered cases and preventive custody (2000-2008)

Preventive	custody No	preventive	custody Total

N % N % N %

2000 108 78% 31 22% 139 100%

2001 94 72% 36 28% 130 100%

2002 155 78% 45 23% 200 100%

2003 130 83% 26 17% 156 100%

2004 161 73% 59 27% 220 100%

2005 102 74% 36 26% 138 100%

2006 152 76% 49 24% 201 100%

2007 237 84% 44 16% 281 100%

2008 163 76% 51 24% 214 100%

Total 1302 78% 377 22% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



201
Additional tables

Table B3.28 Number of cases dealt with by PPS (2000-2009)
200946

Number	of	cases	
dealt	with	by	PPS	(N)

Index	figure		
(2000=1.0) Percentage	growth	compared	with	preceding	year

2000 93 1.0 -

2001 159 1.7 71%

2002 163 1.8 3%

2003 175 1.9 7%

2004 246 2.6 41%

2005 132 1.4 -46%

2006 197 2.1 49%

2007 184 2.0 -7%

2008 281 3.0 53%

200946 204 2.2 -27%

Total 1834 n.a. n.a.

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

46 According to the Public Prosecution Service’s Annual Report 2009.



202
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.29 Cases dealt with by disposition (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Summons	for	human	trafficking 70 75% 99 62% 111 68% 116 66% 175 71% 93 70% 145 74% 144 78% 197 70% 1150 71%

Summons	for	other	offences 3 3% 12 8% 10 6% 11 6% 4 2% 2 2% 9 5% 8 4% 7 2% 66 4%

Unconditional	decision	not	to	
prosecute

18 19% 46 29% 40 25% 42 24% 61 25% 28 21% 41 21% 27 15% 66 23% 369 23%

Joinder - - - - 1 1% 4 2% 1 0% 2 2% 1 1% 1 1% 2 1% 12 1%

Conditional	decision	not	to	
prosecute

- - 1 1% - - - - 2 1% 4 3% - - - - 3 1% 10 1%

Transfer	within	the	PPS - - 1 1% - - 2 1% 1 0% - - - - 2 1% 2 1% 8 0%

Transfer	to	another	institution 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0% 1 1% 1 1% 1 1% 3 1% 8 0%

Out-of-court	settlement 1 1% - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 2 2% - - 1 1% 1 0% 7 0%

Total 93 100% 159 100% 163 100% 175 100% 246 100% 132 100% 197 100% 184 100% 281 100% 1630 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



203
Additional tables

Supplement	to	§	3.4.2:	Suspects	and	offenders	-	Trial	(in	first	instance)
Tables B3.30 to B3.36 provide a complete overview of the available data from the PPS database on human 
trafficking cases dealt with in first instance in the period 2000-2008. See § 3.4 for an explanation of the 
research method and Appendix 2 for explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable 
statistics

Table B3.30 Number of cases dealt with in first instance (2000-2008)

Number	of	cases	
dealt	with	in	first	

instance	(N)
Index	figure	
(2000=1.0) Percentage	growth	compared	with	preceding	year

2000 84 1.0 -

2001 85 1.0 1%

2002 95 1.1 12%

2003 115 1.4 21%

2004 151 1.8 31%

2005 115 1.4 -24%

2006 101 1.2 -12%

2007 115 1.4 14%

2008 152 1.8 32%

Total 1013 n.a. n.a.

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.29 Cases dealt with by disposition (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Summons	for	human	trafficking 70 75% 99 62% 111 68% 116 66% 175 71% 93 70% 145 74% 144 78% 197 70% 1150 71%

Summons	for	other	offences 3 3% 12 8% 10 6% 11 6% 4 2% 2 2% 9 5% 8 4% 7 2% 66 4%

Unconditional	decision	not	to	
prosecute

18 19% 46 29% 40 25% 42 24% 61 25% 28 21% 41 21% 27 15% 66 23% 369 23%

Joinder - - - - 1 1% 4 2% 1 0% 2 2% 1 1% 1 1% 2 1% 12 1%

Conditional	decision	not	to	
prosecute

- - 1 1% - - - - 2 1% 4 3% - - - - 3 1% 10 1%

Transfer	within	the	PPS - - 1 1% - - 2 1% 1 0% - - - - 2 1% 2 1% 8 0%

Transfer	to	another	institution 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0% 1 1% 1 1% 1 1% 3 1% 8 0%

Out-of-court	settlement 1 1% - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 2 2% - - 1 1% 1 0% 7 0%

Total 93 100% 159 100% 163 100% 175 100% 246 100% 132 100% 197 100% 184 100% 281 100% 1630 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



204
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.31 Cases dealt with in first instance by disposition (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Conviction
-	also	for	human	trafficking
-	only	for	other	offences

61
11

73%
13%

67
7

79%
8%

68
16

72%
17%

79
25

69%
22%

114
21

75%
14%

82
17

71%
15%

70
20

69%
20%

73
24

63%
21%

77
35

51%
23%

691
176

68%
17%

Total 72 86% 74 87% 84 88% 104 90% 135 89% 99 86% 90 89% 97 84% 112 74% 867 86%

Complete	acquittal 11 13% 7 8% 10 11% 5 4% 11 7% 13 11% 10 10% 14 12% 33 22% 114 11%

Dismissal	of	the	charges - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Prosecution	declared	inadmissible - - 3 4% 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Joined	at	trial 1 1% 1 1% - - 5 4% 4 3% 3 3% - - 4 3% 7 5% 25 2%

Other	decisions - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Total 84 100% 85 100% 95 100% 115 100% 151 100% 115 100% 101 100% 115 100% 152 100% 1013 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



205
Additional tables

Table B3.31 Cases dealt with in first instance by disposition (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Conviction
-	also	for	human	trafficking
-	only	for	other	offences

61
11

73%
13%

67
7

79%
8%

68
16

72%
17%

79
25

69%
22%

114
21

75%
14%

82
17

71%
15%

70
20

69%
20%

73
24

63%
21%

77
35

51%
23%

691
176

68%
17%

Total 72 86% 74 87% 84 88% 104 90% 135 89% 99 86% 90 89% 97 84% 112 74% 867 86%

Complete	acquittal 11 13% 7 8% 10 11% 5 4% 11 7% 13 11% 10 10% 14 12% 33 22% 114 11%

Dismissal	of	the	charges - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Prosecution	declared	inadmissible - - 3 4% 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Joined	at	trial 1 1% 1 1% - - 5 4% 4 3% 3 3% - - 4 3% 7 5% 25 2%

Other	decisions - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Total 84 100% 85 100% 95 100% 115 100% 151 100% 115 100% 101 100% 115 100% 152 100% 1013 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



206
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.32  Cases dealt with in first instance by most serious registered offence in the indictment 
(2000-2008)47

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Non-aggravated	
human	trafficking

Acquittal - - - - 1 8% 1 9% 2 8% 2 8% 3 20% 4 18% 8 17% 21 13%

Conviction - - 3 100% 12 92% 10 91% 21 88% 22 85% 12 80% 15 68% 37 79% 132 82%

Dismissal	of	the	charges - - - - - - - - 1 4% - - - - - - - - 1 1%

Joined	at	trial - - - - - - - - - - 2 8% - - 3 14% 2 4% 7 4%

Total - - 3 100% 13 100% 11 100% 24 100% 26 100% 15 100% 22 100% 47 100% 161 100%

Aggravated	human	
trafficking

Acquittal 11 16% 6 9% 9 13% 4 4% 6 6% 11 17% 5 8% 10 14% 17 25% 79 12%

Conviction 57 83% 59 86% 61 87% 80 89% 95 91% 54 82% 59 91% 61 85% 47 70% 573 85%

Prosecution	declared	inadmissible - - 3 4% - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 4 1%

Joined	at	trial 1 1% 1 1% - - 5 6% 3 3% 1 2% - - 1 1% 3 4% 15 2%

Other	decisions - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Total 69 100% 69 100% 70 100% 90 100% 104 100% 66 100% 65 100% 72 100% 67 100% 672 100%

Sexual	violence

Acquittal - - - - - - - - 2 18% - - 1 8% - - 5 23% 8 7%

Conviction 12 100% 9 100% 8 89% 9 100% 8 73% 15 100% 11 92% 16 100% 17 77% 105 91%

Prosecution	declared	inadmissible - - - - 1 11% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1%

Joined	at	trial - - - - - - - - 1 9% - - - - - - - - 1 1%

Total 12 100% 9 100% 9 100% 9 100% 11 100% 15 100% 12 100% 16 100% 22 100% 115 100%

Other	violence

Acquittal - - - - - - - - 1 25% - - 1 14% - - - - 2 6%

Conviction 2 100% 1 100% 1 100% 2 100% 3 75% 6 100% 6 86% 5 100% 5 83% 31 91%

Joined	at	trial - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 17% 1 3%

Total 2 100% 1 100% 1 100% 2 100% 4 100% 6 100% 7 100% 5 100% 6 100% 34 100%

Other

Acquittal - - 1 33% - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 30% 4 13%

Conviction 1 100% 2 67% 2 100% 3 100% 8 100% 2 100% 2 100% - - 6 60% 26 84%

Joined	at	trial - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 10% 1 3%

Total 1 100% 3 100% 2 100% 3 100% 8 100% 2 100% 2 100% - - 10 100% 31 100%

Total

Acquittal 11 13% 7 8% 10 11% 5 4% 11 7% 13 11% 10 10% 14 12% 33 22% 114 11%

Conviction 72 86% 74 87% 84 88% 104 90% 135 89% 99 86% 90 89% 97 84% 112 74% 867 86%

Prosecution declared inadmissible - - 3 4% 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Dismissal of the charges - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Joined at trial 1 1% 1 1% - - 5 4% 4 3% 3 3% - - 4 3% 7 5% 25 2%

Other decisions - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Total 84 100% 85 100% 95 100% 115 100% 151 100% 115 100% 101 100% 115 100% 152 100% 1013 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

47  The following has to be noted in interpreting this table: a conviction in a case in which, for example, 
human trafficking is the most serious registered offence charged does not mean that there was also a 
conviction for human trafficking in that case. After all, it is possible that there was a conviction for an 
offence other than human trafficking in the case, while the human trafficking offence was declared 
unproven. The opposite can also apply: in a case where an offence other than human trafficking is 
the most serious registered offence in the indictment (for example, sexual violence), there may be a 
conviction for a human trafficking offence.



207
Additional tables

Table B3.32  Cases dealt with in first instance by most serious registered offence in the indictment 
(2000-2008)47

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Non-aggravated	
human	trafficking

Acquittal - - - - 1 8% 1 9% 2 8% 2 8% 3 20% 4 18% 8 17% 21 13%

Conviction - - 3 100% 12 92% 10 91% 21 88% 22 85% 12 80% 15 68% 37 79% 132 82%

Dismissal	of	the	charges - - - - - - - - 1 4% - - - - - - - - 1 1%

Joined	at	trial - - - - - - - - - - 2 8% - - 3 14% 2 4% 7 4%

Total - - 3 100% 13 100% 11 100% 24 100% 26 100% 15 100% 22 100% 47 100% 161 100%

Aggravated	human	
trafficking

Acquittal 11 16% 6 9% 9 13% 4 4% 6 6% 11 17% 5 8% 10 14% 17 25% 79 12%

Conviction 57 83% 59 86% 61 87% 80 89% 95 91% 54 82% 59 91% 61 85% 47 70% 573 85%

Prosecution	declared	inadmissible - - 3 4% - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 4 1%

Joined	at	trial 1 1% 1 1% - - 5 6% 3 3% 1 2% - - 1 1% 3 4% 15 2%

Other	decisions - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Total 69 100% 69 100% 70 100% 90 100% 104 100% 66 100% 65 100% 72 100% 67 100% 672 100%

Sexual	violence

Acquittal - - - - - - - - 2 18% - - 1 8% - - 5 23% 8 7%

Conviction 12 100% 9 100% 8 89% 9 100% 8 73% 15 100% 11 92% 16 100% 17 77% 105 91%

Prosecution	declared	inadmissible - - - - 1 11% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1%

Joined	at	trial - - - - - - - - 1 9% - - - - - - - - 1 1%

Total 12 100% 9 100% 9 100% 9 100% 11 100% 15 100% 12 100% 16 100% 22 100% 115 100%

Other	violence

Acquittal - - - - - - - - 1 25% - - 1 14% - - - - 2 6%

Conviction 2 100% 1 100% 1 100% 2 100% 3 75% 6 100% 6 86% 5 100% 5 83% 31 91%

Joined	at	trial - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 17% 1 3%

Total 2 100% 1 100% 1 100% 2 100% 4 100% 6 100% 7 100% 5 100% 6 100% 34 100%

Other

Acquittal - - 1 33% - - - - - - - - - - - - 3 30% 4 13%

Conviction 1 100% 2 67% 2 100% 3 100% 8 100% 2 100% 2 100% - - 6 60% 26 84%

Joined	at	trial - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 10% 1 3%

Total 1 100% 3 100% 2 100% 3 100% 8 100% 2 100% 2 100% - - 10 100% 31 100%

Total

Acquittal 11 13% 7 8% 10 11% 5 4% 11 7% 13 11% 10 10% 14 12% 33 22% 114 11%

Conviction 72 86% 74 87% 84 88% 104 90% 135 89% 99 86% 90 89% 97 84% 112 74% 867 86%

Prosecution declared inadmissible - - 3 4% 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Dismissal of the charges - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Joined at trial 1 1% 1 1% - - 5 4% 4 3% 3 3% - - 4 3% 7 5% 25 2%

Other decisions - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

Total 84 100% 85 100% 95 100% 115 100% 151 100% 115 100% 101 100% 115 100% 152 100% 1013 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

47  The following has to be noted in interpreting this table: a conviction in a case in which, for example, 
human trafficking is the most serious registered offence charged does not mean that there was also a 
conviction for human trafficking in that case. After all, it is possible that there was a conviction for an 
offence other than human trafficking in the case, while the human trafficking offence was declared 
unproven. The opposite can also apply: in a case where an offence other than human trafficking is 
the most serious registered offence in the indictment (for example, sexual violence), there may be a 
conviction for a human trafficking offence.



208
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.33 Nature of the convictions in first instance (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Conviction	for	non-aggravated	human	trafficking - - 6 9% 15 22% 18 23% 23 20% 30 37% 19 27% 16 22% 27 35% 154 22%

Conviction	for	aggravated	human	trafficking 61 100% 61 91% 53 78% 61 77% 91 80% 52 63% 51 73% 57 78% 50 65% 537 78%

Total 61 100% 67 100% 68 100% 79 100% 114 100% 82 100% 70 100% 73 100% 77 100% 691 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.34 Convictions in first instance by sentence imposed (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Non-aggravated	human	
trafficking

No	principal	punishment - - - - 1 7% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1%

Only	a	conditional	sentence - - - - 1 7% 1 6% - - 2 7% 1 5% - - - - 5 3%

Custodial	sentence - - 6 100% 12 80% 12 67% 20 87% 26 87% 18 95% 15 94% 27 100% 136 88%

Community	service - - - - 1 7% 3 17% 3 13% 2 7% - - 1 6% - - 10 6%

Fine - - - - - - 2 11% - - - - - - - - - - 2 1%

Total - - 6 100% 15 100% 18 100% 23 100% 30 100% 19 100% 16 100% 27 100% 154 100%

Aggravated	human	
trafficking

No	principal	punishment 1 2% - - - - 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Only	a	conditional	sentence 1 2% - - 2 4% 2 3% 3 3% - - - - 2 4% 2 4% 12 2%

Custodial	sentence 52 85% 50 82% 44 83% 52 85% 81 89% 50 96% 45 88% 54 95% 45 90% 473 88%

Community	service 7 11% 11 18% 7 13% 4 7% 5 5% 2 4% 6 12% 1 2% 3 6% 46 9%

Fine - - - - - - 2 3% 2 2% - - - - - - - - 4 1%

Total 61 100% 61 100% 53 100% 61 100% 91 100% 52 100% 51 100% 57 100% 50 100% 537 100%

Total

No principal punishment 1 2% - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 3 0%

Only a conditional sentence 1 2% - - 3 4% 3 4% 3 3% 2 2% 1 1% 2 3% 2 3% 17 2%

Custodial sentence 52 85% 56 84% 56 82% 64 81% 101 89% 76 93% 63 90% 69 95% 72 94% 609 88%

Community service 7 11% 11 16% 8 12% 7 9% 8 7% 4 5% 6 9% 2 3% 3 4% 56 8%

Fine - - - - - - 4 5% 2 2% - - - - - - - - 6 1%

Total 61 100% 67 100% 68 100% 79 100% 114 100% 82 100% 70 100% 73 100% 77 100% 691 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



209
Additional tables

Table B3.33 Nature of the convictions in first instance (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Conviction	for	non-aggravated	human	trafficking - - 6 9% 15 22% 18 23% 23 20% 30 37% 19 27% 16 22% 27 35% 154 22%

Conviction	for	aggravated	human	trafficking 61 100% 61 91% 53 78% 61 77% 91 80% 52 63% 51 73% 57 78% 50 65% 537 78%

Total 61 100% 67 100% 68 100% 79 100% 114 100% 82 100% 70 100% 73 100% 77 100% 691 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.34 Convictions in first instance by sentence imposed (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Non-aggravated	human	
trafficking

No	principal	punishment - - - - 1 7% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1%

Only	a	conditional	sentence - - - - 1 7% 1 6% - - 2 7% 1 5% - - - - 5 3%

Custodial	sentence - - 6 100% 12 80% 12 67% 20 87% 26 87% 18 95% 15 94% 27 100% 136 88%

Community	service - - - - 1 7% 3 17% 3 13% 2 7% - - 1 6% - - 10 6%

Fine - - - - - - 2 11% - - - - - - - - - - 2 1%

Total - - 6 100% 15 100% 18 100% 23 100% 30 100% 19 100% 16 100% 27 100% 154 100%

Aggravated	human	
trafficking

No	principal	punishment 1 2% - - - - 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Only	a	conditional	sentence 1 2% - - 2 4% 2 3% 3 3% - - - - 2 4% 2 4% 12 2%

Custodial	sentence 52 85% 50 82% 44 83% 52 85% 81 89% 50 96% 45 88% 54 95% 45 90% 473 88%

Community	service 7 11% 11 18% 7 13% 4 7% 5 5% 2 4% 6 12% 1 2% 3 6% 46 9%

Fine - - - - - - 2 3% 2 2% - - - - - - - - 4 1%

Total 61 100% 61 100% 53 100% 61 100% 91 100% 52 100% 51 100% 57 100% 50 100% 537 100%

Total

No principal punishment 1 2% - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 3 0%

Only a conditional sentence 1 2% - - 3 4% 3 4% 3 3% 2 2% 1 1% 2 3% 2 3% 17 2%

Custodial sentence 52 85% 56 84% 56 82% 64 81% 101 89% 76 93% 63 90% 69 95% 72 94% 609 88%

Community service 7 11% 11 16% 8 12% 7 9% 8 7% 4 5% 6 9% 2 3% 3 4% 56 8%

Fine - - - - - - 4 5% 2 2% - - - - - - - - 6 1%

Total 61 100% 67 100% 68 100% 79 100% 114 100% 82 100% 70 100% 73 100% 77 100% 691 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



210
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.35 Custodial sentences imposed in first instance by length of sentence (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Non-aggravated	human	
trafficking

Up	to	1	year - - 2 33% 4 33% 6 50% 9 45% 10 38% 12 67% 7 47% 12 44% 62 46%

1	to	4	years - - 4 67% 7 58% 6 50% 10 50% 15 58% 4 22% 8 53% 15 56% 69 51%

More	than	4	years - - - - 1 8% - - 1 5% 1 4% 2 11% - - - - 5 4%

Total - - 6 100% 12 100% 12 100% 20 100% 26 100% 18 100% 15 100% 27 100% 136 100%

Aggravated	human	
trafficking

Up	to	1	year 8 15% 14 28% 13 30% 19 37% 34 42% 20 40% 19 42% 16 30% 18 40% 161 34%

1	to	4	years 36 69% 24 48% 26 59% 25 48% 39 48% 20 40% 23 51% 35 65% 25 56% 253 53%

More	than	4	years 8 15% 12 24% 5 11% 8 15% 8 10% 10 20% 3 7% 3 6% 2 4% 59 12%

Total 52 100% 50 100% 44 100% 52 100% 81 100% 50 100% 45 100% 54 100% 45 100% 473 100%

Total

Up to 1 year 8 15% 16 29% 17 30% 25 39% 43 43% 30 39% 31 49% 23 33% 30 42% 223 37%

1 to 4 years 36 69% 28 50% 33 59% 31 48% 49 49% 35 46% 27 43% 43 62% 40 56% 322 53%

More than 4 years 8 15% 12 21% 6 11% 8 13% 9 9% 11 14% 5 8% 3 4% 2 3% 64 11%

Total 52 100% 56 100% 56 100% 64 100% 101 100% 76 100% 63 100% 69 100% 72 100% 609 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.36 Cases dealt with in first instance that were appealed (2000-2008)

Appeal 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

None 44 52% 47 55% 46 48% 68 59% 91 60% 60 52% 59 58% 70 61% 90 59% 575 57%

Only	by	public	prosecutor 4 5% 1 1% 11 12% 6 5% 6 4% 11 10% 6 6% 11 10% 10 7% 66 7%

Only	by	suspect	 23 27% 22 26% 24 25% 28 24% 46 30% 26 23% 25 25% 26 23% 36 24% 256 25%

By	both 13 15% 15 18% 14 15% 13 11% 8 5% 18 16% 11 11% 8 7% 16 11% 116 11%

Total 84 100% 85 100% 95 100% 115 100% 151 100% 115 100% 101 100% 115 100% 152 100% 1013 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



211
Additional tables

Table B3.35 Custodial sentences imposed in first instance by length of sentence (2000-2008)

2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

Non-aggravated	human	
trafficking

Up	to	1	year - - 2 33% 4 33% 6 50% 9 45% 10 38% 12 67% 7 47% 12 44% 62 46%

1	to	4	years - - 4 67% 7 58% 6 50% 10 50% 15 58% 4 22% 8 53% 15 56% 69 51%

More	than	4	years - - - - 1 8% - - 1 5% 1 4% 2 11% - - - - 5 4%

Total - - 6 100% 12 100% 12 100% 20 100% 26 100% 18 100% 15 100% 27 100% 136 100%

Aggravated	human	
trafficking

Up	to	1	year 8 15% 14 28% 13 30% 19 37% 34 42% 20 40% 19 42% 16 30% 18 40% 161 34%

1	to	4	years 36 69% 24 48% 26 59% 25 48% 39 48% 20 40% 23 51% 35 65% 25 56% 253 53%

More	than	4	years 8 15% 12 24% 5 11% 8 15% 8 10% 10 20% 3 7% 3 6% 2 4% 59 12%

Total 52 100% 50 100% 44 100% 52 100% 81 100% 50 100% 45 100% 54 100% 45 100% 473 100%

Total

Up to 1 year 8 15% 16 29% 17 30% 25 39% 43 43% 30 39% 31 49% 23 33% 30 42% 223 37%

1 to 4 years 36 69% 28 50% 33 59% 31 48% 49 49% 35 46% 27 43% 43 62% 40 56% 322 53%

More than 4 years 8 15% 12 21% 6 11% 8 13% 9 9% 11 14% 5 8% 3 4% 2 3% 64 11%

Total 52 100% 56 100% 56 100% 64 100% 101 100% 76 100% 63 100% 69 100% 72 100% 609 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.36 Cases dealt with in first instance that were appealed (2000-2008)

Appeal 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

None 44 52% 47 55% 46 48% 68 59% 91 60% 60 52% 59 58% 70 61% 90 59% 575 57%

Only	by	public	prosecutor 4 5% 1 1% 11 12% 6 5% 6 4% 11 10% 6 6% 11 10% 10 7% 66 7%

Only	by	suspect	 23 27% 22 26% 24 25% 28 24% 46 30% 26 23% 25 25% 26 23% 36 24% 256 25%

By	both 13 15% 15 18% 14 15% 13 11% 8 5% 18 16% 11 11% 8 7% 16 11% 116 11%

Total 84 100% 85 100% 95 100% 115 100% 151 100% 115 100% 101 100% 115 100% 152 100% 1013 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



212
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Supplement	to	§	3.4.2:	Suspects	and	offenders	–	Trial	(on	appeal)
Tables B3.37 to B3.41 provide a complete overview of the available data from the OBJD on human traffic-
king cases dealt with on appeal in the period 2000-2008. See § 3.4 for the research method and Appendix 
2 for explanatory notes to the tables in this appendix and the applicable statistics.

Table B3.37 Number of cases dealt with on appeal (2000-2008)
23248

Number	of	cases	dealt		
with	on	appeal Index	figure	(2000=1.0)

Percentage	growth	compared	
with	preceding	year

N %

2000 24 10% 1.0 -

2001 23 10% 1.0 -4%

2002 23 10% 1.0 0%

2003 30 13% 1.3 30%

2004 19 8% 0.8 -37%

2005 35 15% 1.5 84%

2006 42 18% 1.8 20%

2007 27 12% 1.1 -36%

2008 9 4% 0.4 -67%

Total 23248 100% n.a. n.a.

Source: OBJD (reference date: January2010)

Table B3.38 Cases dealt with on appeal by disposition (2000-2004 and 2005-2008)

Disposition 2000	to	2004 2005	to	2008 Total

N % N % N %

Conviction 103 87% 103 93% 206 90%

Acquittal 12 10% 7 6% 19 8%

Prosecution	declared	inadmissible 4 3% 1 1% 5 2%

Total 119 100% 111 100% 230 100%

Source: OBJD (reference date: January 2010)

48 For two cases in the period 2005-2008 there are no judgments, so there is no additional information. 
Consequently, the totals in the two following tables come to 230 rather than 232.



213
Additional tables

Table B3.39  Cases dealt with on appeal by most serious registered offence in the indictment 
(2000-2004 and 2005-2008)49

Most	serious	offence 2000	to	2004 2005	to	2008 Total

N % N % N %

Non-aggravated	
human	trafficking

Conviction 59 95% 57 95% 116 95%

Acquittal 2 3% 2 3% 4 3%

Prosecution	declared	
inadmissible

1 2% 1 2% 2 2%

Total 62 100% 60 100% 122 100%

Aggravated	human	
trafficking

Conviction 14 64% 23 82% 37 74%

Acquittal 6 27% 5 18% 11 22%

Prosecution	declared	
inadmissible

2 9% - - 2 4%

Total 22 100% 28 100% 50 100%

Sexual	violence

Conviction 14 88% 8 100% 22 92%

Acquittal 1 6% - - 1 4%

Prosecution	declared	
inadmissible

1 6% - - 1 4%

Total 16 100% 8 100% 24 100%

Other	violence
Conviction 2 100% 6 100% 8 100%

Total 2 100% 6 100% 8 100%

Other	offences

Conviction 14 82% 9 100% 23 88%

Acquittal 3 18% - - 3 12%

Total 17 100% 9 100% 26 100%

Total

Conviction 103 87% 103 93% 206 90%

Acquittal 12 10% 7 6% 19 8%

Prosecution declared 
inadmisisble

4 3% 1 1% 5 2%

Total 119 100% 111 100% 230 100%

Source: OBJD (reference date: January2010)

49 The following has to be noted in interpreting this table: a conviction in a case in which, for example, 
human trafficking is the most serious registered offence charged does not mean that there was also a 
conviction for human trafficking in that case. After all, it is possible that there was a conviction for an 
offence other than human trafficking in the case, while the human trafficking offence was declared 
unproven. The opposite can also apply: in a case where an offence other than human trafficking is 
the most serious registered offence in the indictment (for example, sexual violence) there may be a 
conviction for a human trafficking offence.



214
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.40 Convictions on appeal by sentence imposed (2000-2004 and 2005-2008)

Type	of	sentence 2000	to	2004 2005	to	2008 Total

N % N % N %

Custodial	sentence 97 94% 92 89% 189 92%

Community	service 6 6% 4 4% 10 5%

Only	a	conditional	sentence - - 4 4% 4 2%

Fine - - 3 3% 3 1%

Total 103 100% 103 100% 206 100%

Source: OBJD (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.41 Custodial sentences imposed on appeal by length of sentence (2000-2004 and 2005-2008)

Length	of	custodial	sentence 2000	to	2004 2005	to	2008 Total

N % N % N %

Up	to	1	year 21 22% 42 46% 63 33%

1	to	4	years 55 57% 35 38% 90 48%

More	than	4	years 21 22% 15 16% 36 19%

Total 97 100% 92 100% 189 100%

Source: OBJD (reference date: January 2010)



215
Additional tables

Supplement	to	§	3.4.3:	Suspects	and	offenders	-	Characteristics
Tables B3.42 to B3.50 provide a complete overview of the available data from the PPS database  concerning 
the suspects registered by the PPS and the offenders convicted in first instance in the period 2000-2008. 
See § 3.4 for an explanation of the research method and Appendix 2 for explanatory notes to the tables 
in this appendix and the applicable statistics

Table B3.42 Number of offenders convicted in first instance (2000-2008)

Number	of	offenders	convicted	
in	first	instance	(N) Index	figure	(2000=1.0)

Percentage	growth	compared	with	
the	preceding	year

2000 61 1.0 -

2001 67 1.1 10%

2002 68 1.1 1%

2003 79 1.3 16%

2004 114 1.9 44%

2005 82 1.3 -28%

2006 70 1.1 -15%

2007 73 1.2 4%

2008 77 1.3 5%

Total 691 n.a. n.a.

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



216
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.43 Gender of suspects (2000-2008)

Female Male N.a.	(legal	entity) Unknown Total
N % N % N % N % N %

2000 38 27% 100 72% - - 1 1% 139 100%

2001 26 20% 104 80% - - - - 130 100%

2002 46 23% 154 77% - - - - 200 100%

2003 35 22% 120 77% 1 1% - - 156 100%

2004 39 18% 178 81% 1 0% 2 1% 220 100%

2005 19 14% 119 86% - - - - 138 100%

2006 32 16% 167 83% 1 0% 1 0% 201 100%

2007 47 17% 232 83% - - 2 1% 281 100%

2008 32 15% 176 82% 2 1% 4 2% 214 100%

Total 314 19% 1350 80% 5 0% 10 1% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.44 Gender of convicted offenders (2000-2008)

Female Male Unknown Total

N % N % N % N %

2000 14 23% 47 77% - - 61 100%

2001 17 25% 50 75% - - 67 100%

2002 14 21% 54 79% - - 68 100%

2003 13 16% 66 84% - - 79 100%

2004 20 18% 94 82% - - 114 100%

2005 10 12% 71 87% 1 1% 82 100%

2006 13 19% 57 81% - - 70 100%

2007 12 16% 60 82% 1 1% 73 100%

2008 8 10% 69 90% - - 77 100%

Total 121 18% 568 82% 2 0% 691 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



217
Additional tables

Table B3.45 Age of suspects (2000-2008)

Younger	
than	18	 18-25	 26-30	 31-40	 41-50	

51	and	
over

N.a.	(legal	
entity) Unknown Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

2000 8 6% 39 28% 35 25% 27 19% 18 13% 8 6% - - 4 3% 139 100%

2001 4 3% 27 21% 23 18% 51 39% 14 11% 10 8% - - 1 1% 130 100%

2002 3 2% 70 35% 44 22% 48 24% 24 12% 10 5% - - 1 1% 200 100%

2003 7 4% 29 19% 29 19% 60 38% 19 12% 11 7% 1 1% - - 156 100%

2004 4 2% 79 36% 35 16% 59 27% 24 11% 17 8% 1 0% 1 0% 220 100%

2005 4 3% 58 42% 23 17% 21 15% 20 14% 10 7% - - 2 1% 138 100%

2006 11 5% 64 32% 27 13% 50 25% 32 16% 14 7% 1 1% 2 1% 201 100%

2007 7 2% 109 39% 63 22% 54 19% 35 12% 13 5% - - - - 281 100%

2008 12 6% 61 29% 38 18% 52 24% 32 15% 15 7% 2 1% 2 1% 214 100%

Total 60 4% 536 32% 317 19% 422 25% 218 13% 108 6% 5 0% 13 1% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

Table B3.46 Age of convicted offenders (2000-2008)

Younger	
than	18	 18-25	 26-30	 31-40	 41-50	

51	and	
over Unknown Total

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N %

2000 6 10% 30 49% 11 18% 7 11% 5 8% 2 3% - - 61 100%

2001 4 6% 12 18% 18 27% 19 28% 8 12% 4 6% 2 3% 67 100%

2002 1 1% 23 34% 15 22% 19 28% 9 13% 1 1% - - 68 100%

2003 - - 15 19% 23 29% 23 29% 11 14% 7 9% - - 79 100%

2004 2 2% 34 30% 19 17% 39 34% 12 11% 8 7% - - 114 100%

2005 1 1% 32 39% 14 17% 23 28% 8 10% 3 4% 1 1% 82 100%

2006 4 6% 29 41% 11 16% 17 24% 5 7% 3 4% 1 1% 70 100%

2007 3 4% 28 38% 15 21% 16 22% 10 14% 1 1% - - 73 100%

2008 5 6% 26 34% 23 30% 17 22% 4 5% 2 3% - - 77 100%

Total 26 4% 229 33% 149 22% 180 26% 72 10% 31 4% 4 1% 691 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)



218
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.47 Average age of suspects (2000-2008)
13550, 12951, 19952, 15553, 21854, 13655, 19856, 21057, 166158

Average	age Number	(N) Standard	Deviation

2000 30,5 13550 10,9

2001 33,2 12951 10,2

2002 30,9 19952 10,4

2003 33,1 15553 10,8

2004 31,8 21854 11,0

2005 30,1 13655 10,7

2006 32,1 19856 11,4

2007 30,6 281 13,4

2008 31,8 21057 11,3

Total 31,5 166158 11,4

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

50 The ages of four suspects are not known.
51 The age of one suspect is not known.
52 The age of one suspect is not known.
53 One suspect is a legal entity.
54 One suspect is a legal entity and the age of one suspect is not known.
55 The ages of two suspects are not known.
56 One suspect is a legal entity and the ages of two suspects are not known.
57 Two suspects are legal entities and the ages of two suspects are not known.
58 Five suspects are legal entities and the ages of twelve suspects are not known.



219
Additional tables

Table B3.48 Average age of convicted offenders (2000-2008)
6559, 8160, 6961, 68762

Average	age Number	(N) Standard	Deviation

2000 26,8 61 9,5

2001 31,9 6559 11,2

2002 31,2 68 9,1

2003 33,7 79 10,7

2004 32,1 114 10,6

2005 30,3 8160 9,4

2006 28,7 6961 9,8

2007 28,8 73 8,9

2008 27,9 77 8,3

Total 30,3 68762 10,0

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)

59 The ages of two suspects are not known.
60 The age of one suspect is not known.
61 The age of one suspect is not known.
62 The ages of four suspects are not known.



220
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.49 Country of birth of suspects (2000-2008)
 

Country	of	birth	of	suspects 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Afghanistan - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 2 0%

Albania 2 1% 4 3%
26

(3’)
13% 5 3% - - - - - - 5 2% 4 2% 46 3% 10

Angola - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0% - - - - 3 0%

Australia - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 2 0%

Belgium 3 2% - - 2 1% 1 1% 2 1% - - 1 0% 1 0% 2 1% 12 1%

Brazil 1 1% 1 1% - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 6 0%

Bulgaria - -
12

(3)
9%

27

(2)
14%

19

(3)
12%

14

(4)
6% 4 3%

13

(4’)
6%

23

(3)
8%

12

(3’)
6% 124 7% 3

Cameroon - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0% - - 2 0%

Cape	Verde - - 1 1% - - - - - - 2 1% - - - - - - 3 0%

China
(including	Hong	Kong)

- - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 1% 2 1% 1 0% 7 3% 13 1% *

Colombia - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 1 1% - - - - - - 3 0%

Congo	
(formerly	Zaire)

- - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 0%

(former)	Czechoslovakia 3 2% 5 4% 2 1% - - 2 1% 5 4% 3 1% 1 0% 2 1% 23 1% *

Dominican	Republic - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% - - 2 0%

Egypt - - 2 2% 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - 5 0%

Estonia 2 1% 2 2% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Ethiopia - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

France 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 4 1% 1 0% 7 0%

Germany
(former	East	Germany	and	former	West	
Germany)

- - 1 1% - - 1 1% 5 2% 1 1% - - 11 4% 7 3% 26 2% **

Ghana
(including	Gold	Coast)

5 4% 3 2% 1 1% - - - - 2 1% - - 2 1% - - 13 1% *

Greece - - - - 2 1% - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 3 0%

Guinea 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Honduras - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Hungary - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - -
6

(4’)
4% 1 0% 2 1%

15

(2)
7% 26 2% **

India
(including	(former)	Portuguese	India)

- - - - - - - - - - - - 8 4% 1 0% 5 2% 14 1% *



221
Additional tables

Table B3.49 Country of birth of suspects (2000-2008)
 

Country	of	birth	of	suspects 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Afghanistan - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 2 0%

Albania 2 1% 4 3%
26

(3’)
13% 5 3% - - - - - - 5 2% 4 2% 46 3% 10

Angola - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0% - - - - 3 0%

Australia - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 2 0%

Belgium 3 2% - - 2 1% 1 1% 2 1% - - 1 0% 1 0% 2 1% 12 1%

Brazil 1 1% 1 1% - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 6 0%

Bulgaria - -
12

(3)
9%

27

(2)
14%

19

(3)
12%

14

(4)
6% 4 3%

13

(4’)
6%

23

(3)
8%

12

(3’)
6% 124 7% 3

Cameroon - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0% - - 2 0%

Cape	Verde - - 1 1% - - - - - - 2 1% - - - - - - 3 0%

China
(including	Hong	Kong)

- - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 1% 2 1% 1 0% 7 3% 13 1% *

Colombia - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 1 1% - - - - - - 3 0%

Congo	
(formerly	Zaire)

- - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 0%

(former)	Czechoslovakia 3 2% 5 4% 2 1% - - 2 1% 5 4% 3 1% 1 0% 2 1% 23 1% *

Dominican	Republic - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% - - 2 0%

Egypt - - 2 2% 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% - - 5 0%

Estonia 2 1% 2 2% 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Ethiopia - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

France 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 4 1% 1 0% 7 0%

Germany
(former	East	Germany	and	former	West	
Germany)

- - 1 1% - - 1 1% 5 2% 1 1% - - 11 4% 7 3% 26 2% **

Ghana
(including	Gold	Coast)

5 4% 3 2% 1 1% - - - - 2 1% - - 2 1% - - 13 1% *

Greece - - - - 2 1% - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 3 0%

Guinea 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Honduras - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Hungary - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - -
6

(4’)
4% 1 0% 2 1%

15

(2)
7% 26 2% **

India
(including	(former)	Portuguese	India)

- - - - - - - - - - - - 8 4% 1 0% 5 2% 14 1% *



222
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Country	of	birth	of	suspects 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Indonesia
((former)	Netherlands	East	Indies)

2 1% 3 2% 1 1% - - 2 1% - - 1 0% - - - - 9 1%

International	area 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Iran - - 2 2% - - - - 2 1% - - 2 1% 2 1% 3 1% 11 1%

Iraq - - 1 1% 6 3% - - 2 1% - - 2 1% - - 1 0% 12 1% *

Ireland - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Israel - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Italy - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 2 0%

Ivory	Coast - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0%

Jordan 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Korea - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Kuwait - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Latvia - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Lebanon - - 2 2% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 3 0%

Liberia 2 1% 1 1% - - 2 1% - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Libya - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Lithuanai 1 1% 2 2% - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 2 1% 6 0%

Malaysia
(including	(former)	British	Borneo)

- - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0%

Mongolia - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Morocco
17

(2’)
12% 5 4% 3 2% 3 2%

9

(5’)
4%

17

(2)
12%

13

(4’)
6% 12 4%

13

(3’)
6% 92 5% 5

Netherlands
39

(1)
28%

30

(1)
23%

51

(1)
26%

46

(1)
29%

91

(1)
41%

54

(1)
39%

75

(1)
37%

95

(1)
34%

76

(1)
36% 557 33% 1

Netherlandse	Antilles 4 3% 1 1% 1 1% 2 1% 7 3% 3 2% 4 2% 12 4% 5 2% 39 2% **

Niger - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0%

Nigeria
17

(2’)
12% 3 2% 7 4% 5 3% 4 2% - - 2 1%

19

(4)
7% 4 2% 61 4% 7

Pakistan - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% - - 1 0% 3 0%

Philippines - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Poland 1 1% - - 4 2% - - 3 1% 3 2% 3 1% 7 2% 5 2% 26 2% *

Portugal - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% - - 3 0%

Romania 3 2% 2 2%
8

(5)
4%

22

(2)
14%

23

(3)
10%

6

(4’)
4%

14

(3)
7%

15

(5)
5% 4 2% 97 6% 4

Continued Table B3.49



223
Additional tables

Country	of	birth	of	suspects 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Indonesia
((former)	Netherlands	East	Indies)

2 1% 3 2% 1 1% - - 2 1% - - 1 0% - - - - 9 1%

International	area 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Iran - - 2 2% - - - - 2 1% - - 2 1% 2 1% 3 1% 11 1%

Iraq - - 1 1% 6 3% - - 2 1% - - 2 1% - - 1 0% 12 1% *

Ireland - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Israel - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Italy - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 2 0%

Ivory	Coast - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0%

Jordan 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Korea - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Kuwait - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

Latvia - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Lebanon - - 2 2% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 3 0%

Liberia 2 1% 1 1% - - 2 1% - - - - - - - - - - 5 0%

Libya - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Lithuanai 1 1% 2 2% - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 2 1% 6 0%

Malaysia
(including	(former)	British	Borneo)

- - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0%

Mongolia - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Morocco
17

(2’)
12% 5 4% 3 2% 3 2%

9

(5’)
4%

17

(2)
12%

13

(4’)
6% 12 4%

13

(3’)
6% 92 5% 5

Netherlands
39

(1)
28%

30

(1)
23%

51

(1)
26%

46

(1)
29%

91

(1)
41%

54

(1)
39%

75

(1)
37%

95

(1)
34%

76

(1)
36% 557 33% 1

Netherlandse	Antilles 4 3% 1 1% 1 1% 2 1% 7 3% 3 2% 4 2% 12 4% 5 2% 39 2% **

Niger - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0%

Nigeria
17

(2’)
12% 3 2% 7 4% 5 3% 4 2% - - 2 1%

19

(4)
7% 4 2% 61 4% 7

Pakistan - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% - - 1 0% 3 0%

Philippines - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0%

Poland 1 1% - - 4 2% - - 3 1% 3 2% 3 1% 7 2% 5 2% 26 2% *

Portugal - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 1 0% - - 3 0%

Romania 3 2% 2 2%
8

(5)
4%

22

(2)
14%

23

(3)
10%

6

(4’)
4%

14

(3)
7%

15

(5)
5% 4 2% 97 6% 4



224
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Country	of	birth	of	suspects 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Saudi	Arabia - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0%

Sierra	Leone - - - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - 1 0% 5 2% 1 0% 9 1% *

Somalia - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 0%

South	Africa - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0%

(former)	Soviet	Union 3 2%
6

(5)
5% 7 4%

11

(5)
7% 8 4% 2 1% 7 3% 1 0% 4 2% 49 3% 9

Sudan 5 4% - - 2 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 8 0% *

Surinam 6 4% 4 3% 5 3% 10 6%
9

(5’)
4%

6

(4’)
4% 11 5% 12 4% 9 4% 72 4% 6

Syria - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Thailand - - - - 1 1% 2 1% - - 1 1% - - 3 1% 1 0% 8 0%

Tunisia 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Turkey
9

(4’)
6%

8

(4)
6%

26

(3’)
13%

16

(4)
10%

24

(2)
11%

15

(3)
11%

18

(2)
9%

28

(2)
10%

10

(5)
5% 154 9% 2

Uganda - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

United	Kingdom	 - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

United	States - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Venezuela - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Vietnam - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 3 0%

(former)	Yugoslavia
9

(4’)
6%

22

(2)
17% 6 3% 3 2% 3 1% 4 3% 6 3% 1 0% 2 1% 56 3% 8

N.	a.	(legal	entity) - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0% - - 1 0% - - 2 1% 5 0%

Unknown - - - - 4 2% 2 1% 2 1% - - 1 0% 5 2% 2 1% 16 1%

Total 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)
Dark blue shading: This country of birth was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this country of birth is in the top 10 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*  Is not in the top 10 overall, but five or more of the suspects registered by the PPS in at least one of the years (2000-2008) 

were born in this country. 
**  Is not in the top 10 overall, but ten or more of the suspects registered by the PPS in at least one of the years (2000-2008) 

were born in this country.

Continued Table B3.49



225
Additional tables

Country	of	birth	of	suspects 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Saudi	Arabia - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0%

Sierra	Leone - - - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - 1 0% 5 2% 1 0% 9 1% *

Somalia - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 3 0%

South	Africa - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0%

(former)	Soviet	Union 3 2%
6

(5)
5% 7 4%

11

(5)
7% 8 4% 2 1% 7 3% 1 0% 4 2% 49 3% 9

Sudan 5 4% - - 2 1% - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - 8 0% *

Surinam 6 4% 4 3% 5 3% 10 6%
9

(5’)
4%

6

(4’)
4% 11 5% 12 4% 9 4% 72 4% 6

Syria - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Thailand - - - - 1 1% 2 1% - - 1 1% - - 3 1% 1 0% 8 0%

Tunisia 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0%

Turkey
9

(4’)
6%

8

(4)
6%

26

(3’)
13%

16

(4)
10%

24

(2)
11%

15

(3)
11%

18

(2)
9%

28

(2)
10%

10

(5)
5% 154 9% 2

Uganda - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

United	Kingdom	 - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

United	States - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Venezuela - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0% - - - - 1 0%

Vietnam - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 1% 3 0%

(former)	Yugoslavia
9

(4’)
6%

22

(2)
17% 6 3% 3 2% 3 1% 4 3% 6 3% 1 0% 2 1% 56 3% 8

N.	a.	(legal	entity) - - - - - - 1 1% 1 0% - - 1 0% - - 2 1% 5 0%

Unknown - - - - 4 2% 2 1% 2 1% - - 1 0% 5 2% 2 1% 16 1%

Total 139 100% 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 138 100% 201 100% 281 100% 214 100% 1679 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January 2010)
Dark blue shading: This country of birth was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this country of birth is in the top 10 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*  Is not in the top 10 overall, but five or more of the suspects registered by the PPS in at least one of the years (2000-2008) 

were born in this country. 
**  Is not in the top 10 overall, but ten or more of the suspects registered by the PPS in at least one of the years (2000-2008) 

were born in this country.



226
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Table B3.50 Country of birth of convicted offenders (2000-2008)

Country	of	birth	of	offenders 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Afghanistan - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Albania 1 2% 3 4% 1 1%
9

(3)
11% 2 2% - - - - - - 1 1% 17 2% *

Angola - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%

Belgium
3

(5’)
5% - - - - 2 3% 1 1% 2 2% - - - - 1 1% 9 1%

Brazil - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Bulgaria
3

(5’)
5% 2 3%

8

(3)
12%

15

(2)
19%

11

(4)
10%

4

(5)
5%

4

(5’)
6%

4

(4’)
5%

7

(2)
9% 58 8% 2

Cape	Verde - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%
Colombia - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Czechoslovakia
3

(5’)
5% 3 4% 1 1% - - - - - -

6

(3’)
9% 3 4% - - 16 2% *

Dominican	Republic 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Egypt - - - - 2 3% - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Estonia - - 1 1% 3 4% - - - - - - - - - - - - 4 1%

Germany	(including	former	German	
Federal	Republic)

- - - - - - - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - 2 0%

Ghana - -
4

(5)
6% - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 5 1%

Greece - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%
Guinea 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Hungary - - - - 2 3% - - - - 2 2%
4

(5’)
6% 1 1%

5

(4’)
6% 14 2% *

India - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 3% - - 2 0%

Indonesia
((former)	Netherlands	East	Indies)

- - 3 4% 1 1% 1 1% - - 1 1% - - - - - - 6 1%

International	area - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Iran - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - 2 3% 1 1% 5 1%

Iraq - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%
Ivory	Coast - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Jordan - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Korea - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%
Kuwait - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%
Latvia - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Liberia - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Lithuania - - - - 1 1% - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - 3 0%

Morocco
7

(2’)
11% 2 3% 3 4% 2 3%

7

(5’)
6% 3 4%

13

(2)
19% 2 3%

5

(4’)
6% 44 6% 5



227
Additional tables

Table B3.50 Country of birth of convicted offenders (2000-2008)

Country	of	birth	of	offenders 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Afghanistan - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Albania 1 2% 3 4% 1 1%
9

(3)
11% 2 2% - - - - - - 1 1% 17 2% *

Angola - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%

Belgium
3

(5’)
5% - - - - 2 3% 1 1% 2 2% - - - - 1 1% 9 1%

Brazil - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Bulgaria
3

(5’)
5% 2 3%

8

(3)
12%

15

(2)
19%

11

(4)
10%

4

(5)
5%

4

(5’)
6%

4

(4’)
5%

7

(2)
9% 58 8% 2

Cape	Verde - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%
Colombia - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Czechoslovakia
3

(5’)
5% 3 4% 1 1% - - - - - -

6

(3’)
9% 3 4% - - 16 2% *

Dominican	Republic 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Egypt - - - - 2 3% - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 0%

Estonia - - 1 1% 3 4% - - - - - - - - - - - - 4 1%

Germany	(including	former	German	
Federal	Republic)

- - - - - - - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - - - 2 0%

Ghana - -
4

(5)
6% - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 5 1%

Greece - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%
Guinea 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Hungary - - - - 2 3% - - - - 2 2%
4

(5’)
6% 1 1%

5

(4’)
6% 14 2% *

India - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 2 3% - - 2 0%

Indonesia
((former)	Netherlands	East	Indies)

- - 3 4% 1 1% 1 1% - - 1 1% - - - - - - 6 1%

International	area - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Iran - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - 2 3% 1 1% 5 1%

Iraq - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%
Ivory	Coast - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%

Jordan - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Korea - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%
Kuwait - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%
Latvia - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Liberia - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Lithuania - - - - 1 1% - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - 3 0%

Morocco
7

(2’)
11% 2 3% 3 4% 2 3%

7

(5’)
6% 3 4%

13

(2)
19% 2 3%

5

(4’)
6% 44 6% 5



228
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Country	of	birth	of	offenders 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Netherlands
19

(1)
31%

19

(1)
28%

15

(1)
22%

26

(1)
33%

36

(1)
32%

36

(1)
44%

21

(1)
30%

24

(1)
33%

35

(1)
45% 231 33% 1

Netherlands	Antilles 2 3% 3 4% - - - - 2 2% 3 4% - -
4

(4’)
5%

6

(3)
8% 20 3% 9

Nigeria
6

(4)
10%

5

(4)
7% 2 3% - - 5 4% - - - - - - - - 18 3% 10

Pakistan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%
Poland - - - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% 2 3% - - 5 1%

Romania 1 2% - - - -
7

(4’)
9%

17

(2)
15% 3 4% 3 4%

13

(2)
18% 3 4% 47 7% 4

Sierra	Leone - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Soviet	Union - -
6

(3)
9%

5

(5)
7% 5 6%

7

(5’)
6%

5

(4)
6% - - 1 1% 3 4% 32 5% 6

Sudan 1 2% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 3 0%

Surinam
3

(5’)
5% - - 2 3% 1 1%

7

(5’)
6%

8

(3)
10% 1 1%

4

(4’)
5% 4 5% 30 4% 7’

Thailand - - - - - - 1 1% 1 1% - - 1 1% - - - - 3 0%

Tunisia 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Turkey 2 3% 2 3%
6

(4)
9%

7

(4’)
9%

14

(3)
12%

9

(2)
11%

6

(3’)
9%

5

(3)
7%

5

(4’)
6% 56 8% 3

United	Kingdom - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

United	States - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Yugoslavia
7

(2’)
11%

9

(2)
13%

10

(2)
15% - - 1 1% - - 1 1% 2 3% - - 30 4% 7’

(former)	Zaire - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% 2 0%

Unknown - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%

Total 61 100% 67 100% 68 100% 79 100% 114 100% 82 100% 70 100% 73 100% 77 100% 691 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January2010)
Dark blue shading: This country of birth was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this country of birth is in the top 10 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*  Is not in the top 10 overall, but five or more of the persons convicted in first instance in at least one of the years  

(2000-2008) were born in this country.

Continued Table B3.50



229
Additional tables

Country	of	birth	of	offenders 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 Total
Top	
10

N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % N % R

Netherlands
19

(1)
31%

19

(1)
28%

15

(1)
22%

26

(1)
33%

36

(1)
32%

36

(1)
44%

21

(1)
30%

24

(1)
33%

35

(1)
45% 231 33% 1

Netherlands	Antilles 2 3% 3 4% - - - - 2 2% 3 4% - -
4

(4’)
5%

6

(3)
8% 20 3% 9

Nigeria
6

(4)
10%

5

(4)
7% 2 3% - - 5 4% - - - - - - - - 18 3% 10

Pakistan - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0%
Poland - - - - 1 1% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% 2 3% - - 5 1%

Romania 1 2% - - - -
7

(4’)
9%

17

(2)
15% 3 4% 3 4%

13

(2)
18% 3 4% 47 7% 4

Sierra	Leone - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Soviet	Union - -
6

(3)
9%

5

(5)
7% 5 6%

7

(5’)
6%

5

(4)
6% - - 1 1% 3 4% 32 5% 6

Sudan 1 2% 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - - - 3 0%

Surinam
3

(5’)
5% - - 2 3% 1 1%

7

(5’)
6%

8

(3)
10% 1 1%

4

(4’)
5% 4 5% 30 4% 7’

Thailand - - - - - - 1 1% 1 1% - - 1 1% - - - - 3 0%

Tunisia 1 2% - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 0%

Turkey 2 3% 2 3%
6

(4)
9%

7

(4’)
9%

14

(3)
12%

9

(2)
11%

6

(3’)
9%

5

(3)
7%

5

(4’)
6% 56 8% 3

United	Kingdom - - - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 0%

United	States - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - - - 1 0%

(former)	Yugoslavia
7

(2’)
11%

9

(2)
13%

10

(2)
15% - - 1 1% - - 1 1% 2 3% - - 30 4% 7’

(former)	Zaire - - - - - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% 2 0%

Unknown - - - - - - 1 1% - - - - 1 1% - - - - 2 0%

Total 61 100% 67 100% 68 100% 79 100% 114 100% 82 100% 70 100% 73 100% 77 100% 691 100%

Source: PPS database (reference date: January2010)
Dark blue shading: This country of birth was in the top 5 in the relevant year (the ranking is shown between brackets after the 
number) or this country of birth is in the top 10 overall (the ranking is shown in the last column).
*  Is not in the top 10 overall, but five or more of the persons convicted in first instance in at least one of the years  

(2000-2008) were born in this country.



230



A4	 List	of	activities	of	BNRM	in	2009

1	 Interviews,	meetings	and	working	visits	(Netherlands)63	64

1.1	Police/Royal	Netherlands	Marechaussee/special	investigative	services

Centre of Expertise on Human Trafficking and Migrant Smuggling (EMM)*

National Expert Group on Human Trafficking (LEM)*

Operational Consultation Group on Trafficking in Human Beings (OOM)* 

Police Academy

Police in Someren, regional police force for Brabant Zuid-Oost

1.2	Public	Prosecution	Service

B9 working group 

Financial, Environmental and Food Safety Offences Office: chief public prosecutor*

Financial, Environmental and Food Safety Offences Office: department of policy and strategy

National Office: Public prosecutor for migrant smuggling and human trafficking *

Chief Public Prosecutor, Amsterdam*

National consultative body of public prosecutors for human trafficking and migrant smuggling *

Procurator General with the human trafficking portfolio *

63 Various meetings were held with some of the listed individuals and agencies, sometimes in different 
compositions and in the context of different meetings.

64 Periodic meetings that are regularly attended by BNRM are marked *. Meetings at which BNRM made 
a contribution in the form of a presentation are marked **.



232
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

1.3	Judiciary

Attendance at various court sessions 

National Consultative Body for Presidents of Criminal Divisions of Courts (LOVS)**

Council for the Judiciary 

The Hague District Court

President of the Criminal Division of The Hague District Court and chairman of LOVS

Presidents of the Immigration Law sections of the district courts **

President of the Children’s Court judges working group 

1.4	Social	services,	victim	support	groups	and	NGOs

BLinN* 

Youth Care Agency, The Hague

COA: Review Committee for the development of a methodology for protected shelter * 

CoMensha*

Fier Fryslan 

IOM 

OKIA 

Platform CoMensha* 

PMW Humanitas Rotterdam 

Rode Draad 

SPIRIT, MEISA, ACM, NIDOS, municipality of Amsterdam: Meisa pilot project on human trafficking

Stichting Jade, municipalities of Schipborg and Assen 

1.5	Government,	semi-state	sector	and	politics

Labour Inspectorate/Labour Market Fraud Department, Intervention Team for retail trade in Hengelo 

Municipality of Amsterdam

Managing Director, IND 

Focus Group Workshop for Municipalities*

Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations

Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations: Department of Police and Security Regions

Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations: Directorate for General Security 

Ministry of Foreign Affairs: Department of Cabinet and Protocol, and BLinN*

Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry of Justice *

Minister of Justice*

Ministry of Justice: Custodial Institutions Agency, Juvenile Affairs department 

Ministry of Justice: Director of Individual Juvenile Affairs



233
List of activities of BNRM in 2009

Ministry of Justice: Directorate for the Administration of Justice and Law Enforcement, Organised  

Crime department

Ministry of Justice: Interdepartmental consultation group on human trafficking *

Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment: Director-General for Administration, Enforcement and Operations

Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment, BLinN, CoMensha*

Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment: Director of Labour Relations 

Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment: SIOD*

Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment: director of SIOD 

Minister for Youth and Family

Task Force on Human Trafficking *

Lower House of Parliament: Chairman of the Permanent Committee for Justice*

1.6	Research/academia/advisory	bodies

Monitoring committee for Chinese beauty sector

Erasmus University Rotterdam 

Human rights research and consultancy

Information meeting on Caselex 

University of Leiden: Department of criminal law and department of criminology

University of Leiden: Criminology alumni association **

University of Utrecht: Faculty of Law, Economics and Governance

University of Amsterdam: Political Science**

1.7	Visits	and	delegations	from	abroad

Aruba and Netherlands Antilles: Country coordinators and CoMensha

Bulgaria: Bulgarian National Commission for combating trafficking in human beings, Bulgarian anti-human 

trafficking organisations, KLPD, IPOL

ICMPD: Associate Project Officer

International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) and the Dutch Red Cross 

Jordan: Jordan’s Ministry of Labour and National Police Force

Nigeria: Naptip, IOM 

Paraguay: Director-General for Human Rights

Poland: President of the Halina Niec Legal Aid Centre and La Strada Poland 

United Arab Emirates: Delegation from various public and private organisations, human rights organisations 

and the public prosecution service

United Arab Emirates: delegation from various organizations arranged by the Bridging the Gulf foundation

Sweden: National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 



234
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

2	 Congresses,	symposia,	study	days	and	lectures	(Netherlands)

De Lunchclub, a lecture club for women, The Hague** Lecture on trafficking in human beings The Hague,  

12 January 2009

Municipality of Rotterdam Municipal approach, national responsibility  

(signing of agreement on human trafficking)  

Rotterdam, 4 February 2009

BNRM** Expert meeting: Complaints/B9 with few leads for 

investigation The Hague, 9 February 2009

BNRM and University of Utrecht** Conference on Human Trafficking, turning our  

attention to labour exploitation Utrecht,  

12-13 February 2009

CIROC Seminar: Chinese and Chinese organised crime

Amsterdam, 18 February 2009

Defence for Children International Nederland** Kick-off meeting for ‘Building blocks for children’s 

rights. Further with the recommendations of the UN 

Children’s Rights Committee’ The Hague,  

19 February 2010

Lecture club** Lecture on human trafficking The Hague, 9 March

Tijdschrift voor Criminologie/Nederlandse Vereniging 

voor Kriminologie

Discussion: ‘Qualitative research in criminology’  

(Willem Pompe Institute) Utrecht, 13 March 2009

Aliens Police** Theme day on Other forms of exploitation 

Utrecht, 25 March 2009

Voorziening tot Samenwerking (VTS) Politie 

Nederland

Cope 09 Amsterdam Conference A conference on 

Interoperability and Information Exchange of Police 

Forces of the EU Member States Amsterdam,  

30-31 March 2009

Defence for Children** Expert panel on the Annual Report on Children’s 

Rights 2009 Amsterdam, 6 April 2009

Flarenetwork.org** Meeting: ‘Season of Legality’ The Hague, 9 April 2009

Studiecentrum Kerckebosch Practical day on ‘Customising the BIBOB instruments’ 

Ede-Wageningen, 10 April 2009

Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations /police 

forces/Police Quality Agency /Police Academy*

NIK day: ‘Information-led policing, how do we stand?’

 Ede, 23 April 2009

Police Academy Seminar in Nigerian criminal networks Apeldoorn,  

12 May 2009

Ministry of Foreign Affairs Lecture by former director of NAPTIP The Hague,  

119 May 2009

 SHOP** Conference: ‘Human trafficking. A problem without 

borders’. The Hague, 27 May 2009

The Hague District Court Lecture by J. de Wijkerslooth de Weerdesteyn on the 

Framework Decision on the standing of victims in 

criminal proceedings The Hague, 9 June 2009

SSR** Course on human trafficking

Zutphen, 12 June 2009 and 25 November 2009



235
List of activities of BNRM in 2009

Task Force on Human Trafficking Working visit by Minister of Justice “Human  

Trafficking and official presentation of the Action Plan 

of the Task Force on Human Trafficking” Rotterdam, 

1 July 2009

National Office of the Public Prosecution Service** First national meeting of regional holders of the  

Human Trafficking and Migrant Smuggling portfolio 

The Hague, 11 September 2009

BLinN Symposium on Chinese victims of human trafficking 

Amsterdam, 17 September 2009

Medilex** National Study Day on Loverboys, Utrecht,  

30 September 2009

University of Amsterdam** Guest lecture for Master’s programme in  Political 

Science Amsterdam, 14 October 2009

NVvR* Roundtable meeting on “European asylum law”

The Hague, 26 October 2010

BLinN** Opening of exhibition ‘Bought and Sold: Voices of 

Human Trafficking’ The Hague, 18 October 2009

BNRM and Task Force on Human Trafficking** Theme day on Human Trafficking and Presentation of 

the Rapporteur’s seventh report  Utrecht,  

29 October 2009

WIK* Annual meeting of Integral Chain working group 

Amsterdam, 12 November 2009

Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment Theme day “Beyond the crisis – lessons after 2010”

The Hague, 16 November 2009

Gooische Lezingenclub** Presentation for the Gooische Lezingenclub

Hilversum, 18 November 2009

Police Academy National meeting in Police Data Act Nieuwegein,  

18 November 2009

IFLRY** Seminar on Human Trafficking: “I am not for sale”

Amsterdam, 19 November 2009

UNICEF* Summit on children’s rights  Leiden,  

20 November 2009

SIOD** Presentation on case-law on other forms of exploita-

tion for CIE-SIOD The Hague, 25 November 2009

Police Academy Theme day on financial investigations Apeldoorn,  

27 November 2009

KLPD Theme day on crime analysis

Ede, 2 December 2009

Swedish embassy in the Netherlands, Ministry of 

Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Defence

Women in War Zones - Second Swedish-Dutch  

Conference on Gender Equality The Hague,  

3 December 2009 

University of Leiden** PAO course in human trafficking Leiden,  

4 December 2009



236
Trafficking in Human Beings Ten years of independent monitoring

Movisie National congress in combating juvenile prostitution

Utrecht, 7 December 2009

ECP (Platform for Internet Security) Kick-off for platform on internet security The Hague, 

9 December 2009

University of Leiden Oration by Professor J. van der Leun Leiden,  

11 December 2009

Ministry of Justice Mid-term conference ‘Tackling serious forms of  

nuisance together’ The Hague, 16 December 2009

3	 International	working	visits,	congresses	and	other	activities

IOM and Federal Ministry of the Interior, Austria** Final ministerial conference guidelines for the 

collection of data on trafficking in human beings, 

including comparable indicators  Vienna,  

23-24 February 2009 

ICMPD and the Ministerstvo Vnutra Slovenskej 

Republiky**

THB Data Collection and Harmonised Information 

Management Systems DCIM EU 2nd Project Team 

and Advisory Board Meeting Warsaw,  

12-13 March 2009

Ministry of the Interior of the Czech Republic** Joint Analysis, Joint Action – Conference of EU 

National Rapporteurs on Trafficking in Human 

Beings Prague, 30-31 March 2009

OSCE* Conference Alliance against Trafficking in  

Persons – Technical Alliance Export Coordination 

Team Vienna, 21 April 2009

OSCE Conference Alliance against Trafficking in  

Persons – Technical Seminar on trafficking for 

labour exploitation focusing on the agricultural 

sector Vienna, 27-28 April 2009

Home Affairs Committee * International Seminar on Combating Human 

Trafficking, London, 14 May 2009

Ministry of Justice Sweden, IOM* 1st National Networking Meeting Towards Global 

EU Action against Trafficking in Human Beings 

Stockholm, 28 May 2009

Crime Prevention Department of The Ministry of the  

Interior of the Czech Republic

Expert Conference - Preventing and Combating 

Trafficking in Human Beings: Reducing Prostituti-

on and Sexual Exploitation. Pilsen, 2-4 June 2009

European Commission, Directorate-General Justice,  

Freedom and Security**

Informal meeting of National Rapporteurs or 

Equivalent Mechanisms on Trafficking in Human 

Beings Brussels, 18 June 2009

OSCE** High Level Seminar on Trafficking in Human 

Beings Ashgabad, 24-26 August 2009

Prosecutor General’s Office of Ukraine and the Ukrainian 

Association of Prosecutors* 

14th Annual Conference and General Meeting of 

the International Association of Prosecutors Kiev, 

7-8 September 2009



237
List of activities of BNRM in 2009

Ministry of Justice Sweden, IOM* 2nd Steering Committee Meeting Towards Global 

EU Action against Trafficking in Human Beings

Vienna, 10 September 2009

OSCE Prevention of Modern Slavery: “An Ounce of  

Prevention is Worth a Pound of Cure” Vienna, 

14-15 September 2009

ILO** Technical Consultation on the use of trafficking 

indicators for prosecution Lisbon,  

23-24 September 2009

Institute for International Research on Criminal Policy Expert meeting MONTRASEC,  Brussels,  

1 October 2009

Task Force on Human Trafficking Working visit by Task Force on Human Trafficking 

to the Netherlands Antilles 13-18 October 2009

Ministry of Justice Sweden, IOM and Payoke** EU Ministerial Conference: Towards Global EU 

Action against Trafficking in Human Beings  

Brussels, 19-20 October 2009

Ariadne European Human Rights Funders Network and 

European Foundation Centre**

The Intelligent Funders Guide to the Human 

Rights Architecture of Europe Brussels,  

25 November 2009

Centre for Parliamentary Studies** Tackling Child Trafficking and Exploitation in the 

EU Brussels, 2 December 2009

Institute for International Research on Criminal Policy Working visit MONTRASEC Ghent,  

14 December 2009



238






