









































Human trafficking 
is happening here

Fact sheet accompanying the Ninth 

report of the Dutch Rapporteur



Human trafficking is happening here 

Human trafficking is happening here. Recent years have made 
clear that people can be exploited in many ways and in many 
places. In prostitution, but elsewhere as well, such as the 
agricultural and horticultural sectors, and the catering industry. 
Not long ago a conviction was handed down for the exploitation 
of street newspaper vendors.

Human traffickers take advantage of people who are often in 
a weak position or they use violence to coerce others to work 
for them. Crimes like these demand a tough approach. Human 
trafficking must not pay and we must do our best to protect the 
victims of human trafficking. 

Victims and the way we deal with new or existing forms of 
human trafficking are a key part of my Ninth report. You will 
find the recommendations in this fact sheet. Human trafficking 
is a complex phenomenon. We can only succeed in tackling the 
problem if society at large and government agencies are aware 
of this and together take a firm stance. A robust response has 
been mobilised in the past few years. However, the battle against 
human trafficking is never won. The effort to fight it remains our 
challenge for the years ahead. 

Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen,
National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human 
Beings and Sexual Violence against Children

Co
py

rig
ht

: I
va

r T
eu

ni
ss

en



Non-Dutch victims Dutch victims

Adult victims with 
Dutch nationality

Underage victims with 
Dutch nationality

‘Loverboy’ victims are human 
trafficking victims. They need 
to be recognised as such’

The ‘loverboy’ phenomenon has been an issue in the 
Netherlands for more than fifteen years. The term, however, is a 
misnomer, for in fact loverboys are human traffickers. Now‘s the 
time to call loverboys by their proper name and treat their prey 
as victims of human trafficking. 

At the present time care for these victims is inadequate, notably 
in the case of underage victims of domestic trafficking. Instead 
of seeing them as girls experiencing the typical problems of 
adolescence, we need to realise they are human trafficking 
victims. All professionals working in care for minors need to 
become aware of this. 

The expertise to recognise underage victims of domestic 
trafficking would appear to be lacking in the youth care sector. 
No specialisation on the subject exists and not enough is being 
invested in training. Nor is any specialist care package available. 
The lack of training has repercussions on registration. It is 
plausible to assume that failure to recognise or acknowledge 
these victims of human trafficking results in underreporting. As 
a result at the moment the Netherlands does not comply with 
the various European directives regarding the protection of 
minor victims of sexual exploitation. 

The recommendation to the Minister of Health, Welfare and 
Sport and the Minister of Security and Justice is to bring the 
protection of minor victims of domestic human trafficking in 
line with European legislation and regulations. Identification, 
registration and care, including suitable and safe shelter, are 
crucial parts of this. 

Domestic human trafficking
Domestic human trafficking involves victims and perpetrators who both come 
from the country where the exploitation takes place. Of the registered possible 
victims of human trafficking in the period 2007-2011 one third were Dutch. In 
2011, as many as 39 per cent of the Dutch victims were underage. The picture 
apparently did not change in 2012. Some human traffickers would seem to wait 
to exploit their victims in legal prostitution until the girls have reached the age of 
eighteen, the age at which voluntary prostitution is legal in the Netherlands. The 
fear is that the grooming period, or the recruitment phase, and the subsequent 
sexual exploitation, also outside the legal sex industry, already begins at a 
young age.

Dutch victims 2011

Nationality of notified victims 2007-2011

39%

32%

68%

61%



‘Victims of human trafficking 
are entitled to protection. 
That is why all government 
agencies need to know what 
they should do’ 

During a spot check at a farm a labour inspector discovered 
a shed in which people were working in bad conditions. The 
workers said they were earning three euros an hour. The farm 
was enclosed by a high fence that was always kept shut. In a 
similar check in the prostitution sector a detective encountered 
two seventeen year old girls. They spoke neither Dutch nor 
English and one of them had bruises on her shoulder. Neither 
girl had a passport. 

In both situations there are sufficient indications that the people 
in question could be victims of human trafficking. If government 
agencies encounter possible victims of human trafficking they 
need to know what to do to protect them. The victims must also 
be registered. Although government agencies in the Netherlands 
carry out good work there is no single comprehensive document 
that clearly defines who should do what and when, and how, 
to protect the victims. The documents that do exist are barely 
accessible, fragmented and not binding. 

Change is needed here. The National rapporteur recommends 
that the Minister of Security and Justice should ensure the 
development of a national referral mechanism, a comprehensive 
document which includes work and procedural protocols for the 
protection of victims. 



‘The prostitution industry 
is susceptible to human 
trafficking. A uniform approach 
is needed to combat abuse. 
The position of prostitutes 
must be strengthened. Clients 
must be held accountable’ 

Prostitution is not a synonym for human trafficking, but the 
prostitution industry has proved to be particularly prone to use 
for trafficking purposes. The idealised picture of the voluntarily 
self-employed prostitute is not borne out by the facts. The 
prostitution sector must be made less susceptible. This is a 
challenge that requires a broad package of measures. 

There is no single panacea. The first step is to formulate 
consistent policy. At the moment policy on prostitution differs 
from municipality to municipality. This is an invitation to 
human traffickers to search for local authorities who have no 
policy or who barely enforce it, if at all. The coming into force of 
the new legislation on prostitution is a first step. Filling in the 
further details of the policy on prostitution is a responsibility 
of the local authorities. They are best advised to cooperate at 
regional level to coordinate policy and thus prevent some places 
becoming more attractive to human traffickers than others. 

Making the prostitution industry less susceptible requires 
more than just legislation and regulations. Supervision and 
enforcement of prostitution policy is crucially important. 
Improving the position of prostitutes is also vital. Local 
authorities should explicitly include the improvement of the 
position of prostitutes in their policy. 

Clients, too, have a responsibility to reduce the susceptibility 
of the prostitution industry to trafficking. Recourse to criminal 
law is one of the means available. The recommendation is that it 
should be made an offence for a person to use the sexual services 
of a prostitute if he knows, or can reasonably be assumed to 
know, that he or she has been coerced or pressurised and is in 
fact a victim of human trafficking. 



‘Too little attention is paid to 
exploitation outside the sex 
industry. It is important to be 
alert to new forms of human 
trafficking.’

Exploitation comes in many guises and occurs everywhere. Not 
just in the sex industry, but beyond. 

Frequently mentioned sectors are agriculture and horticulture 
and the catering industry, where labour exploitation can occur. 
Little attention is paid to this form of exploitation, observes 
the National Rapporteur. The engrained idea in society at large 
and in government agencies is that this is a less serious forms of 
exploitation. Examples in the report prove otherwise. Like sexual 
exploitation this form of human trafficking equally serves to 
undermine the social fabric. 

Besides exploiting people’s labour new phenomena have 
recently been connected with exploitation, such as forced 
begging and applying for allowances under coercion. It is crucial 
that the government is prepared for the occurrence of these new 
forms of human trafficking. Awareness-raising and training are 
vital. Important, too, is the identification of new partners in 
the battle against human trafficking. If a new form of human 
trafficking is discovered we need to ask which agency within 
the government and beyond has the authority to intervene 
effectively. 

Exploitation outside the sex industry must be actively tracked 
down since it is often concealed from society and government 
agencies. Tackling exploitation outside the sex industry therefore 
needs to become a policy priority. Creative investigations must 
be followed by effective prosecution. 

The Minister of Security and Justice and the Minister of Social 
Affairs and Employment are recommended to pay more 
attention to tackling this form of exploitation. Moreover, 
organisations confronted with new forms of human trafficking 
must continue investing in training and consciousness-raising 
and dealing with the identification of human trafficking. 

Victims, sectors of exploitation 2011

Exploitation in 
the sex industry

Domestic work Catering 
Drugs trade

Crime

Au pair

Agriculture and horticulture

Exploitation outside 
the sex industry

Cleaning

Sector unknown

Not (yet) worked

Unknown

Sectors of exploitation outside the sex industry 2011



‘Victims can only be 
successfully protected if 
criminal investigations and 
care are linked’

Players in the care sector – such as youth care, the municipal 
health service and care and shelter agencies – have a major job 
to do in identifying possible victims and play a key role when 
it comes to the protection of victims. Protection can only be 
effective if the authorities from the different domains work 
together. 

A lot has been invested in cooperation at the regional and local 
level in the Netherlands in recent years. The Netherlands has 
Regional Information and Expertise Centres (RIEC) and Safety 
Coordination Houses (Veiligheidshuizen), two collaborative groups 
that enable organised crime and local crime to be tackled. 
Various agencies meet in these groups to coordinate their 
activities optimally. The link between the different cooperating 
groups is essential, both to prevent gaps in the tackling of 
human trafficking and to avoid duplication. 

Although structures are present in the Netherlands to link 
care, enforcement, investigation and prosecution in practice 
this proves difficult. The coming into force of a new covenant 
for example now makes it impossible for those providing care 
to sit down together with the other agencies in the Regional 
Information and Expertise Centres.The Safety Coordination 
Houses can still do so. Hence, establishing a link between the 
Regional Information and Expertise Centres and the Safety 
Coordination Houses is all the more essential. 

Connection is the key word, because there is no need to create 
something new when the Regional Information and Expertise 
Centres and the Safety Coordination Houses already exist. The 
Minister of Security and Justice is recommended to foster the 
link between the Regional Information and Expertise Centres 
and the Safety Coordination Houses. The collaborating groups 
themselves need to see to the necessary links in their own 
organisations. 

Exploitation in 
the sex industry



The Dutch Rapporteur reports 
on the nature and scale of 
human trafficking and sexual 
violence against children in 
the Netherlands

What is human trafficking?
Human trafficking is exploitation or the intent to exploit. In 
fact it covers all labour or services which are performed under 
duress, in the widest sense of the word, and which people have 
not chosen to do voluntarily. Human trafficking and exploitation 
may be accompanied by poor working and living conditions 
though not always. 

What does the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in 
Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children do?
The National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and 
Sexual Violence against Children reports on the nature and scale 
of human trafficking and sexual violence against children in 
the Netherlands. The rapporteur monitors the effects of policy 
conducted in these domains, identifies bottlenecks and makes 
recommendations to improve the tackling of these themes. The 
National Rapporteur has no investigative authority and is not a 
complaints agency. Internationally, the Rapporteur has a unique, 
independent position in relation to the government and is both 
a national and international authority.

Who is the National Rapporteur?
The National Rapporteur is Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen. 
Dettmeijer-Vermeulen has worked for years as judge, most 
recently as vice-president of the district court at The Hague. She 
was previously a public prosecutor. 

The National Rapporteur is supported in her work by a team 
of researchers from diverse disciplines including lawyers, 
criminologists, anthropologists, politicologists, philosophers 
and social psychologists.

What activities does the National Rapporteur carry out?
The National Rapporteur publishes reports on human trafficking 
and sexual violence against children in the Netherlands and 
on the effects of the government policies pursued. The reports 
contain recommendations for improving measures to tackle 
human trafficking and sexual violence against children, 
information about relevant legislation and regulations, 
prevention, the detection and prosecution of perpetrators and 
care for victims. The National rapporteur collects quantitative 
and qualitative data by means of independent research, 
through research in external databases and the organisation 
and participation in meetings and conferences. The rapporteur 
takes part in diverse task forces and expert groups in the field 
of human trafficking and sexual violence against children. The 
National rapporteur is also active internationally. She advises 
within a network of rapporteurs on the European policy to be 
conducted in the fight against human trafficking. 

Postal address
P.O. Box 20301
2500 EH The Hague

Telephone: + 31 (0) 70 370 45 14
www.dutchrapporteur.nl 


