






































Research brief

Vienna International Centre, PO Box 500, 1400 Vienna, Austria 
Tel.: (+43-1) 26060-0, Fax: (+43-1) 26060-5866, www.unodc.org

Monitoring Target 16.2 of the United Nations  
Sustainable Development Goals  

A multiple systems estimation of the numbers of presumed 
human trafficking victims in the Netherlands in 2010-2015 
 by year, age, gender, form of exploitation and nationality



 

 

 
Foreword 
 

The Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against 

Children and the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime are proud to present a joint 

report on a multiple systems estimation of the number of presumed human trafficking victims 

in the Netherlands.  

 

This joint venture was triggered by the need of the Dutch National Rapporteur to gain insight 

into the actual volume of human trafficking in the Netherlands and is part of UNODC’s 

efforts to assist countries to monitor Sustainable Development Goals indicator 16.2.2 (number 

of victims of human trafficking per 100,000 population, by sex, age and form of exploitation). 

Knowing the total number of trafficked victims (detected and not detected) helps the 

Netherlands to tackle human trafficking more effectively, while the development and 

application of an innovative methodology can serve as a tool for other United Nations 

Member States. 

 

Since human trafficking is a hidden crime, statistics on identified trafficking victims only 

reveal a small part of the problem, and the actual number of victims can only be estimated 

through statistical techniques. For methodological and definitional reasons, no comprehensive 

estimation of the true volume of presumed trafficked victims in the Netherlands was 

available. With  this new study  the ‘dark figure’ of trafficking in persons and the ‘dark figure 

ratios’ of different groups of presumed victims has been revealed so more targeted policy 

interventions can now be implemented to improve the detection of – and assistance to – the 

most hidden populations. In the Dutch context, these include underage victims, Dutch victims, 

and victims of trafficking for non-sexual exploitation.  

 

By using multi-year data and by including four relevant covariates into the model (gender, 

age, nationality and form of exploitation), the results are more robust and more stable over 

time than the previous multiple systems estimation published for the Netherlands. A thorough, 

scientific approach has been followed to compute the estimates presented in this document 

and we are confident that the results - between 5,000 and 8,000 presumed victims per year, of 

which about 2,000-3,000 foreign presumed victims of sexual or non-sexual exploitation - 

approach the actual order of magnitude of trafficking in persons in the Netherlands. 



 

 

Presenting such figures is a great step forward in the field of trafficking in persons research, 

which we hope can be taken up by many other countries so that ultimately a solid global 

figure on the total number of victims can be computed.   

 

While the estimates are based on a substantially improved MSE methodology, limitations still 

need to be considered. Therefore, we encourage the continuing development, testing and 

validation of the MSE methodology and its application to trafficking in persons. 

 

The development of this brief has been a unique and valuable experience for all parties 

involved. It has showed how close cooperation between methodological experts on multiple 

systems estimation and national experts on human trafficking and data collection is essential. 

We hope that this collaboration will incite other countries to initiate similar studies. 

 

Our thanks go to prof. Jan J.M. van Dijk for initiating this important project and bringing 

together all the different parties, and to dr. Maarten Cruyff and prof. Peter G.M. van der 

Heijden for their work in further developing the MSE methodology and subsequently 

applying it to the data of the Netherlands. 

 

 

Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen, Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 

and Sexual Violence against Children 

Angela Me, Chief, Research and Trend Analysis Branch, United Nations Office on Drugs and 

Crime 

  



1 

 

Monitoring Target 16.2 of the United Nations’ Sustainable 

Development Goals; a multiple systems estimation of the 

numbers of presumed human trafficking victims in the 

Netherlands in 2010-2015 by year, age, gender, form of 

exploitation and nationality 
 

Based on a contribution by Jan J. M. van Dijk, Maarten Cruyff, Peter G. 

M. van der Heijden and Suzanne L. J. Kragten-Heerdink  
 

 

 

Executive summary 

In September 2015, United Nations Member States adopted the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable 

Development. At the heart of this bold agenda are the Sustainable Development Goals 

(SDGs); a set of goals aimed at stimulating action in a wide range of policy areas. Trafficking 

in persons features prominently in the agenda as three of the goals include targets that 

specifically mention this crime.  

The measurement of crime in general and trafficking in persons specifically is challenging 

because much of the conduct remains undetected and unreported. While there is data on the 

number of reported cases of trafficking worldwide, the ‘dark (or hidden) figure’ remains 

unknown. The present paper explores the application of a recent methodology to generate a 

sound estimate of the ‘dark figure’ of trafficking in persons. The hope is that such studies will 

be replicated in many countries so that the severity of trafficking can be monitored over time. 

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime is the guardian of the United Nations 

Convention against Transnational Organized Crime, and its supplementing Protocol to 

Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children. The 

National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children 

of the Netherlands is one of the foremost national research centres on this topic.  

These two entities carried out a joint, in-depth pilot test of a promising methodology, multiple 

systems estimation (MSE), to estimate the total presumed yearly number of trafficking 

victims in the Netherlands, broken down by age, sex, form of exploitation and nationality. 

The key finding is that in 2014 and 2015, the most recent years for which records are 

available, the total number of presumed victims of human trafficking in the Netherlands was 

approximately 6,250-6,500 per year. This means that the estimated numbers are four to five 

times higher than the recorded numbers of detected victims. 



2 

 

Abstract 

A multiple systems estimation (MSE) was carried out using the statistics on possible victims 

identified by different groups of organizations reporting to CoMensha1 on behalf of the Dutch 

National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children 

over a period of six consecutive years (2010 - 2015). In total six different groups of 

organizations (lists) reported to CoMensha, among which the Border Police. The presumed 

victims reported by the Border Police concern presumed victims of a particular type of 

trafficking that is not informed by the Palermo Protocol. Moreover, this type of trafficking is 

no longer upheld as human trafficking by the Supreme Court in the Netherlands. For these 

reasons, two log-linear models were fitted: one including those reported by the Border Police 

(based on six lists, concerning 8,234 presumed victims between 2010 and 2015), and one 

excluding those exclusively reported by the Border Police (based on five lists, concerning 

6,935 presumed victims between 2010 and 2015). To enhance the robustness of the estimates, 

they were stratified by four covariates, namely age (minor/adult), gender (female/male), form 

of exploitation (sexual/non-sexual) and nationality (Dutch/non-Dutch).  

The key finding is that in 2014 and 2015, the most recent years for which records are 

available, the total number of presumed victims of human trafficking in the Netherlands was 

approximately 6,500 (six lists) / 6,250 (five lists) per year. This means that the estimated 

numbers are four to five times higher than the recorded numbers of victims that come to the 

attention of the authorities. 

Expressed as rates per 100,000 persons, the rate of presumed victims is about 38/37 (six/five 

lists) per 100,000 inhabitants per year (based on the estimates for 2014 and 2015). The 

victimization rates are 32/29 (six/five lists) per 100,000 adult Dutch females, 1 per 100,000 

adult Dutch males (in both models), 235/257 (six/five lists) per 100,000 Dutch girls (between 

12-17 years old) and 14 (in both models) per 100,000 Dutch boys (between 12-17 years old). 

The rate of non-Dutch (legal or illegal) residents is 326/311 (six/five lists) victims per 

100,000, or about fifteen/fourteen (six/five lists) times higher than for Dutch nationals (22 per 

100,000 in both models). 

 

1 The challenge of counting victims of human trafficking 

In 2016, the United Nations adopted the target to ‘end abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all 

forms of violence and torture against children’ as Target 16.2 of its 2030 Agenda for 

                                                        
1 CoMensha has been appointed as the official registration organization of all identified possible victims of 

human trafficking in the Netherlands on behalf of the Dutch National Rapporteur. 



3 

 

Sustainable Development (under Goal 16: Promote peaceful and inclusive societies for 

sustainable development, provide access to justice for all and build effective, accountable and 

inclusive institutions at all levels). To monitor implementation of this Target, the UN 

Statistical Commission's Interagency and Expert Group on SDG Indicators (IAEG-SDGs) 

recommended (among other indicators): ‘Number of victims of human trafficking per 100,000 

population, by sex, age and form of exploitation.’ The United Nations Office on Drugs and 

Crime (UNODC) has been identified as the custodian international agency responsible for the 

global reporting of the indicator and for providing support to Member States to collect data on 

the indicator. In order to fulfill this commitment UNODC has been working with Member 

States and the academic community to develop methodologies to estimate the number of 

undetected victims of trafficking in persons. 

Statistics on detected victims are routinely collected by statistical authorities across the world. 

These national statistics are periodically collated by international organizations such as 

UNODC and Eurostat, and used by UNODC as the basis for its biennial Global Reports on 

Trafficking in Persons (GLOTIP). However, these statistics say very little about the true 

volume of trafficking in persons. They reflect just ‘the tip of the iceberg.’ If the ratio between 

the recorded cases and the real numbers would - as is the case with icebergs - be roughly 

constant over time and across countries, the numbers of recorded cases would provide useful 

information. In that case, the true numbers could simply be multiplied by the constant factor 

to arrive at estimates of the true volume. Unfortunately, the presumption of 19th century 

criminologists of constant ratios between numbers of recorded and real cases of crime has 

proven to be untenable. The detection rates of law enforcement agencies show great variation 

both over time and across countries, and so do consequently ratios between recorded crimes 

and total crimes and victims. Rankings of countries in terms of recorded crimes per 100,000 

inhabitants often bear little or no relationship to the ranking of the real total crime numbers. 

Many countries with high levels of corruption report very few arrests or convictions for 

corruption (Van Dijk, 2008). This might also be the case with the offence of human 

trafficking. To give just one example, taken from the GLOTIP report of 2014, the 

Netherlands, population 17 million, registered about 1,700/1,300 (six/five lists) victims of 

human trafficking in 2012, whereas the United States of America, population 500 million, a 

mere 500 victims, and Japan, population 127 million, 27. If these numbers were taken at face 

value, the rate of trafficking victims per 100,000 would in the Netherlands be 100/76 (six/five 

lists) times higher than in the United States, and 470/360 (six/five lists) times higher than in 

Japan. Even assuming that the Netherlands would be faced with uniquely serious problems of 



4 

 

exploitation – an assumption for which there is no basis - these comparative statistics beggar 

belief. More likely, the lower rates in the United States and Japan reflect a different level of 

detection and recording of victims.  

Within the European Union, the rates of identified victims per 100,000 reported to Europol 

for 2012 vary between lows in Portugal (0.0), Germany (0.8) and Sweden (0.9) to highs in the 

Netherlands (10.2), Bulgaria (7.9) and Romania (5.2) (Eurostat, 2015). As revealed 

elsewhere, this variation reflects differences in defining, identifying and recording victims 

rather than in their actual numbers (Van Dijk et al, 2014). The European rates show highly 

diverging trends in the numbers of identified victims between 2010 and 2012 as well. These 

changes over time too largely reflect changes in identification strategies and recording 

policies rather than in the volume of the crime (Eurostat, 2015). In publications on numbers of 

recorded crimes UNODC and Eurostat have warned against interpreting these statistics as 

measures of the true volumes of crime. In recent years, Eurostat has refrained from publishing 

statistics of identified victims per country altogether. Clearly, to monitor progress with SDG 

Target 16.2, other international human trafficking statistics than the official figures of 

recorded victims are urgently needed.  

The estimation of statistics on undetected victims poses a formidable challenge, known in 

criminology as the old problem of assessing the “hidden figure of crime”. Criminologists have 

made headway with cracking the “hidden figures” through the conduct of annual surveys 

among the public about personal or household experiences with common types of crime. 

Examples of such surveys include the National Crime Victims Surveys in the United States 

(Addington & Rennison, 2014), the National Crime Victims Survey of England and Wales 

(Jansson, 2006), the National Safety Monitor in the Netherlands (Smit & van Dijk, 2014) and, 

for comparative purposes, the International Crime Victims Surveys (Van Dijk, 2015). 

UNODC has developed standards to implement large-scale victimization surveys and has 

been supporting countries to undertake victimization surveys (UNODC-UNECE Manual on 

Victimization Surveys, 2010). Surveys to explore the hidden figure of trafficking in persons 

are more complex than general victimization surveys. Some have experimented with survey 

methodology to collect data on forced labour, including trafficking in persons for forced 

labour (ILO, 2012). Gallup International has designed and tested a standardized questionnaire, 

which is used as module in its annual World Poll. In this questionnaire, respondents are asked 

about forced labour victimization experiences of themselves or family members over the past 

year. The first survey results in a sample of developing countries have revealed some 

limitations. Unlike burglary or street mugging, the crime of human trafficking/forced labour 



5 

 

tends to be statistically rare, and more deeply “hidden” in the population at large. General 

victimization surveys on common crimes produce victimization rates of, on average, 15 per 

cent per year. The first surveys conducted by Gallup Int. and others produced prevalence rates 

for non-sexual exploitation far below 1 per cent. The reliable estimation of annual changes in 

this phenomenon per country will require large sample sizes, and concomitant budgets. Also, 

with such small numbers of identified victims, little can be said about the nature of trafficking 

cases or the characteristics of the victims. In the Western world the challenges are even bigger 

since exploitation seems heavily concentrated among hard to find migrant workers, especially 

in the case of labour exploitation (Zhang, 2012; Abraham & Van Dijk, 2017). To complicate 

matters further, the first batch of Gallup surveys detected almost no cases of sexual 

exploitation. Respondents seemed reluctant to report cases of sexual exploitation experienced 

by themselves or family members. Data collection about sexual exploitation through 

interviewing may prove to be very challenging in many countries if not impossible due to 

endemic feelings of fear or shame among respondents. Measuring sexual exploitation, just 

like measuring domestic violence through surveys, requires the use of highly trained 

interviewers and special interview techniques, which will be hard to sustain on a large scale 

across the world.  

In conclusion, data on numbers of detected victims provide little or no information on the true 

numbers of total victims and, when presented in a comparative perspective, can easily lead to 

fundamentally flawed conclusions. Research using sample population surveys may cast light 

on the true extent of forced labour in developing countries, but not on the volume of sexual 

exploitation. With current methods, the SDG proposed indicator on numbers of victims, 

disaggregated by sex, age and form of exploitation, is unlikely to be comprehensively 

reported through survey research alone.  

 

2 An international definition allowing a range of interpretations 

In the past, efforts of the United Nations to collect international statistics on crime were 

hampered by the lack of internationally recognized definitions of even the most common 

types of crime such as household burglary, robbery and assault (United Nations, 1950). More 

recently, the development of the International Classification of Crime for Statistical Purposes 

(ICCS) has enhanced the collection of comparable crime data although it will take time for all 

countries to fully implement the classification. Trafficking in persons is among the few types 

of crime for which a treaty-based international definition exists.  



6 

 

Most national counter-trafficking legislation is largely based on recently adopted international 

instruments, particularly the United Nations Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish 

Trafficking in Persons.2 This so-called Palermo Protocol, adopted in the year 2000, has to 

date been ratified by 170 countries. Article 3(a) of the Palermo Protocol provides the basis for 

much national legislation: ““Trafficking in persons” shall mean the recruitment, 

transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of the threat or use of 

force or other forms of coercion, [...], for the purpose of exploitation.” In this definition, one 

recognizes a threefold structure: for trafficking in persons to be constituted it is necessary to 

prove an act with a means and with a purpose of exploitation. The means used in the process 

of trafficking can be non-violent in nature such as deception or abuse of a person’s position of 

vulnerability. Furthermore, Article 3(b) of the Palermo Protocol states that consent on the part 

of the victim is irrelevant if one of the means in Article 3(a) is used. Finally, Articles 3(c) and 

3(d) of the Palermo Protocol codify that in the case of a victim younger than eighteen years, 

there is no need to prove the use of a ‘means’.  

Despite this widely shared definition, the national legal definitions of human trafficking (in 

national criminal codes), and in particular their interpretations, still differ greatly between 

countries (Aromaa, 2007; Dutch National Rapporteur, 2012; Esser and Dettmeijer-

Vermeulen, 2016; Gallagher, 2010; UNODC, 2013; UNODC, 2014; UNODC, 2015). One of 

the reasons might be that key aspects of the Palermo Protocol definition, including the 

element of ‘purpose of exploitation’, are not uniformly interpreted and, therefore may not be 

consistently applied in different jurisdictions (UNODC, 2013; UNODC, 2014; UNODC, 

2015). Although the Palermo Protocol definition has been duly incorporated in the criminal 

codes of a large number of countries, the international comparability of statistics on identified 

human trafficking is still hampered by considerable variation in the national definitions and 

interpretations.  

Because this publication is about the estimated number of victims in the Netherlands, it is 

important to reflect on the Dutch interpretation of the Palermo Protocol definition of human 

trafficking. The Netherlands applies a relatively broad interpretation, both with regard to the 

element ‘abuse of a position of vulnerability’ as well as with regard to the element of ‘purpose 

of exploitation’ (Esser and Dettmeijer-Vermeulen, 2016). Therefore, it is to be expected that 

the number of identified cases as well as the estimation of the total number of victims, is 

                                                        
2 Protocol to prevent, suppress and punish trafficking in persons, especially women and children, supplementing 

the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (available at: 

http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/treaties/CTOC/index.html) 



7 

 

higher than in countries with a more restrictive interpretation. Moreover, while the Dutch 

definition (Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code (DCC) is predominantly based on the 

Palermo Protocol, it is not solely based on it. Article 273f DCC includes aspects that are not 

informed by the Palermo Protocol and are based on an older international instrument.3 For 

instance Article 273f (1)(3) DCC considers the recruiting, taking or abducting of a person 

with the intention of inducing that person to make himself or herself available for prostitution 

in another country. Until recently, neither means nor the intention of exploitation was 

required. However, in 2016 the Dutch Supreme Court ruled that the intention of exploitation 

is actually a “latent” part of this subsection of the Dutch definition.4 This means that since this 

ruling, the Dutch definition of human trafficking changed and has become narrower.5  

National laws of other countries may contain similar (historical) peculiarities in their 

definitions of human trafficking that go beyond the Palermo Protocol. This further 

compromises international comparisons. 

For reasons of international comparability, and because the particular type of trafficking 

under Article 273f (1)(3) DCC is no longer upheld as human trafficking by the Supreme 

Court in the Netherlands, this paper presents estimated numbers of victims both including and 

excluding the victims of this particular type of trafficking (reported by the KMar, the Dutch 

Border Police, see hereafter). 

  

3 National referral systems and multi - source datasets  

As explained above, both the measurement of the hidden figures of human trafficking through 

population surveys and the lack of uniformity in the definition of human trafficking, pose 

formidable methodological challenges for the collection of international statistics on this type 

of crime. On a more positive note, estimating the true volume of human trafficking is favored 

by one unique feature of data collection on human trafficking victims, namely the 

involvement of a variety of different institutions besides the police. This multi-agency 

involvement flows directly from the victim-centeredness of the Palermo Protocol, which 

stipulates that the fight against human trafficking must be equally focused on the arrest and 

punishment of offenders and providing protection and assistance to victims. Victims of 

human trafficking should be allowed to remain temporarily or permanently in the country 

                                                        
3 The International Convention for the Suppression of the Traffic in Women of Full Age (1933).  
4 Supreme Court 17 May 2016, ECLI:NL:HR:2016:857. 
5 Which emphasizes the prominent role of national judges in the interpretation of the trafficking definition (Esser 

and Dettmeijer-Vermeulen, 2016) and the fact that national definitions of human trafficking are  not 

univocal/comparable over time. 



8 

 

where they are identified and should be offered protection and assistance. This dual focus on 

punishment and protection calls for the involvement of other organizations besides police and 

border control in the identification of victims. As prescribed in the United Nations Model 

Law against Trafficking in Persons, 6  governmental and non-governmental organizations 

should play a supporting role in the identification of victims, enabling them to reach out to 

victims and offer assistance to them independently of action by law enforcement authorities. 

In Europe, national multi-agency referral and identification systems involving all relevant 

actors have for years been promoted by, inter alia, the Organization for Security and 

Economic Co-operation in Europe (OSCE/ODIHR, 2004). Consequently, in many Western 

and Eastern European countries, national multi-agency systems of identifying and supporting 

victims, known as National Referral Mechanisms (NRMs) have duly been put in place. For 

example, in the United Kingdom, dedicated NGOs, municipal agencies and the police work 

together to identify persons who are entitled to special services and protection as possible 

victims of human trafficking. In the Netherlands, a coordinated approach to consistently 

protect possible victims of human trafficking that have been identified by the different 

relevant actors/organizations (like the National Police, the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee 

[RNLM, in Dutch: KMar, further: the Border Police], NGOs, municipal institutions, et 

cetera), has been in practice for years already. The formal establishment of an official NRM is 

currently under development following the EU Directive on Human Trafficking and the 

European Commission’s Strategy towards the Eradication of Trafficking in Human Beings 

2012-2016, and subsequently the recommendation of the Dutch National Rapporteur on 

Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children (further: Dutch National 

Rapporteur) (Dutch National Rapporteur, 2013).  

The primary aim of multi-agency identification and referral mechanisms is to assure that all 

victims, including those who are reluctant to cooperate with the police, are duly offered 

protection and support. A positive side effect of such mechanisms is that their administrative 

records can provide comprehensive statistics on all persons identified as victims by any of the 

organizations in the country participating in an NRM or equivalent arrangement. In Europe, 

Eurostat in its 2012 questionnaire on human trafficking specifically required Member States 

to report on the organizations that provided data regarding registration of victims and to 

indicate the procedures used to collect the data (Eurostat, 2015). In 2012, the police are the 

principal source for the registration of victims in fifteen Member States. Six Member States 

                                                        
6 Available at: http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/legal-tools/model-treaties-and-laws.html. 



9 

 

provided data originating from NGOs, three Member States from ‘Border Guards’ and two 

from ‘Immigration Services’. ‘Labour Inspectors’ were reported in one Member State. The 

category ‘Others’ as registration source included: 

·  victim support units (Hungary), 

·  prosecutors (Lithuania), 

·  IOM-International Organization for Migration (Poland, the Netherlands, Romania), 

·  social services (United Kingdom, Romania), 

·  reception centres (Finland), 

·  prisons (United Kingdom), 

·  local authorities, regional councils (the Netherlands, United Kingdom). 

 

The possibility that the same persons might be counted twice or more by different reporting 

organizations complicates the collection of aggregated statistics. For example, in Germany 

and Austria, the police and the NGO community maintain parallel data systems of the 

numbers of victims they have identified. It is certain that many victims identified by the 

police have received services from NGOs and vice versa, but the extent of the overlap is 

unknown. For this reason, the numbers of victims recorded by the police and the NGOs 

cannot be added up for a total count. The victims reported to Eurostat by Germany and 

Austria are therefore derived from the databases of the national police only and miss out on 

victims exclusively identified by NGOs.  

In order to arrive at more comprehensive counts, controlling for double counting of the same 

victims, the collation of data from all relevant sources has in many countries been 

commissioned to single entities. Examples include the United Kingdom Human Trafficking 

Centre (UKHTC) of the British Home Office, the government funded NGO Coordination 

Centre for Trafficking in Human Beings (Dutch acronym: CoMensha) on behalf of the Dutch 

National Rapporteur, the Centre for the Protection of Human Trafficking Victims in Serbia 

and the Ministry of Interior in Romania. Units responsible for these statistics have for some 

time promoted the use of unique identifiers in the data collected from the various contributing 

organizations while safeguarding data protection standards.  

Whereas the gathering of statistics on trafficking victims from different organizations was 

initially seen as a factor complicating statistical analyses, the recording of persons belonging 

to the same hidden population by different organizations now proves to be an asset for the 

estimation of the dark figures. The existence of multiple lists of identified victims have in fact 

become a useful tool to develop methodology based on the capture-recapture approach to 

estimate total number of victims. In 2012, ILO researchers applied capture-recapture analysis, 

using two teams of researchers identifying cases of forced labour from public sources, to 



10 

 

estimate the global numbers of forced labour victims at any time (ILO, 2012). However, 

despite the fact that the methodology of this estimate was innovative in the context of human 

trafficking at the time, there were still significant reservations (Dutch National Rapporteur, 

2012; Gould, 2010). The Dutch National Rapporteur emphasized in this context the 

importance of combining the substantive knowledge of professionals engaged in the fight 

against human trafficking and statistical expertise (Dutch National Rapporteur, 2012), 

especially on methods to estimate the scale of hidden populations. In 2014, at an expert 

meeting on “Researching hidden populations: approaches to and methodologies for generating 

data on trafficking in persons”, convened by UNODC, Prof Peter van der Heijden elaborated 

on the potential of multi-source data systems for estimating the true numbers through various 

techniques (Van der Heijden et al, 2015). He explained the advantages of using three or more 

different registers in the estimation models, as practiced in MSE.  

In 2014 a team of researchers under the leadership of Prof. Bernard Silverman, chief scientist 

of the Home Office in London, actually applied MSE to the integrated multi-source dataset on 

persons identified as possible victims of human trafficking in the United Kingdom in 2012 

(Silverman, 2014; Bales et al, 2015). This exercise was replicated in the Netherlands with the 

data CoMensha collected in 2014 on behalf of the Dutch National Rapporteur (Van Dijk and 

van der Heijden, 2016). The following section first describes how MSE works, illustrated by 

the British and Dutch studies just mentioned. Then the results of an MSE of the total number 

of victims (detected and undetected) in the Netherlands are presented, disaggregated by age, 

sex, form of exploitation and nationality per year for the period between 2010 and 2015 using 

an integrated, multi-year dataset with four covariates provided by the Dutch National 

Rapporteur. 

 

4 The alternative of multiple systems estimation (MSE) 

The statistical technique to estimate the volume of hidden populations, known as capture-

recapture analysis, multiple systems analysis or multiple record systems analysis, was 

originally developed by biologists to estimate animal populations. Although the precise 

historical origins of the technique are disputed, Danish marine biologist Johannes Petersen 

(1860-1928) is often credited with the early use of the capture-recapture method to estimate 

the sizes of fish populations.  

The quintessential idea to estimate the number of fish in a pond is as follows. One catches a 

number of fish (say 100), tags them, and then throws them back into the same pond. Some 

time later, one takes a new catch (say another 100) from the same pond, and counts how many 



11 

 

of the second catch are tagged, as being part of the returned original first catch. If the overlap 

between the two catches is zero, or very small, this suggests that the population of fish in the 

pond is much larger than 100. If the overlap is considerable, say 50, this suggests that the 

population is smaller. The larger the overlap, the smaller the size of the fish population. If of 

the 100 fishes in the second catch, 20 are tagged, it follows that tagged fishes in the pond had 

a chance of one in five of being caught. Assuming that the non-tagged fishes have similar 

catchment chances, the total number of fishes in the pond can be estimated at 500, of which 

400 untagged. 

The capture-recapture approach of biologists has translated into a well-known method for 

estimating the size of a hidden human population using two independent recording systems 

(or registers) which partially list its members. Linking the individuals in the two registers 

allows for the estimation of the number of individuals that are not recorded in any of the 

registers. For example, with two registers A and B, linkage gives a count of individuals in A 

but not in B, a count of individuals in B but not in A, and a count of individuals in both A and 

B. The counts form a contingency table denoted by A × B, with the variable labeled A being 

short for “inclusion in register A” differentiating between the categories “yes” and “no,” and 

likewise for register B. The statistical problem is to estimate the value in the cell “no, no”. An 

estimate of the total population size is obtained by adding the estimated count of doubly 

missed individuals to the counts of individuals found in at least one of the registers. 

The capture-recapture method has been successfully applied to estimate the size of hidden 

human populations by determining the overlaps between unique individuals appearing in 

separate recording systems (or lists). Using such capture-recapture analysis, estimates have, 

for example, been made of the numbers of casualties of human rights violations in Peru and 

irregular migrants in the Netherlands (Lum, Price & Banks, 2013; Van der Heijden, et al,  

2015).  

Capture-recapture analysis depends on certain assumptions about the lists and the population 

from which they are drawn. Arguably the most problematic condition to fulfill when using 

recording systems of human individuals is the condition that recording systems are 

independent of each other. In the case of records of persons, this assumption of independence 

of lists is usually not met. For example, persons identified by law enforcement authorities as 

possible victims of human trafficking are likely to be referred to social assistance programs, 

and they consequently have a higher probability of being included in the recording systems of 

the involved NGOs. In this case the inclusion in the list of a service provider is far from 

independent from registration by the police. This is an example of positive dependence. Since 



12 

 

such positive dependence increases the overlap between the two lists, the number of the 

unobserved population is consequently underestimated. In practice negative dependence may 

also occur, for example, when inclusion in one register lowers the chance of being registered 

in another register, which leads to an overestimation.  

A promising approach to relax the condition of independence is to include a third register, or 

multiple registers, and to analyze the three way, or multiple way contingency tables. With 

three (or more) lists the independence assumption in the two-list case is replaced by the less 

severe assumption that three (or more) factor interaction is absent. In official statistics, this 

extension of the two-list capture-recapture method is known under the name of multiple 

systems estimation (MSE).  

In the United Kingdom, the obligation to identify presumed victims of human trafficking is 

discharged by the NRM, a framework for identifying victims and ensuring they receive 

appropriate protection and support. Its datasets are managed by the United Kingdom Human 

Trafficking Centre (UKHTC) of the Home Office. The National Crime Agency (NCA) of the 

Home Office collates data from various sources to produce Strategic Assessments of 

presumed victims. In 2013, 2,744 unique presumed trafficking victims were identified. The 

information about presumed victims came from a large number of separate source 

organizations. This information can be summarized into five lists based on the source type:  

• LA: Local Authority 

• NG: Non-governmental organization  

• PF: Police force/National Crime Agency 

• GO: Government Organization (mostly Home Office agencies e.g. UK Border Force, 

Gangmasters Licensing Authority)  

• GP: The general public, through various routes 

Of the 2,744 victims included in the 2013 database some appeared on two and a few on three 

or four of the five lists. Table 1 shows the distribution of the identified victims over the five 

lists.  

 

 

 

 

 



13 

 

Table 1: Contingency table for the National Crime Agency Strategic Assessment data, 

2013*  

 

Source: Silverman (2014). 

*Each column shows the number of cases which fall in the combination of lists indicated by the cells marked. 

Columns corresponding to patterns which do not occur in the observed data are omitted. 

 

The bottom row of Table 1 gives the numbers of presumed victims falling under each of the 

possible categories. MSE allows an estimation of the number of individuals not appearing on 

any of the lists, given the distribution of individuals in the contingency table. This is done by 

assuming that each of the counts is derived from a Poisson distribution, a distribution for the 

occurrence of rare events. A restrictive Poisson log-linear model is estimated for each of the 

cells and the parameter estimates are projected on the cell with the non-appearing (or hidden) 

individuals (Baillargeon & Rivest, 2007). With log-linear modeling, it is possible to assess how 

much being on one particular list affects a person’s chances of being on another. Possible 

interactions between lists can be detected, and controlled for in the estimates. The condition 

of independence can therefore be relaxed.  

Bales, Hesketh and Silverman (2015) fitted a log-linear model to the data in Table 1 which 

allows for individual list effects, and also for interaction between lists. The estimated number 

of victims was 11,304. The 95 per cent confidence interval for the actual population size was 

estimated as between 10,000 to 13,000, including the 2,744 victims already known. This 

suggests that the Strategic Assessment was aware of roughly 20 per cent to 30 per cent of all 

possible victims in the UK in 2013. In round numbers, therefore, the dark figure is around 

7,000 to 10,000.  

There is a positive correlation between list LA and each of lists NG and PF, so that being 

known to the local authority apparently increases the chance of being known to NGOs or the 

police. This may reflect the existence of referral pathways for potential victims between these 

agencies, in particular in relation to minors who, unlike adults, do not need to consent to 

referral to the NRM, or joint operations between the local authorities and other agencies. The 

upshot of the exploratory MSE carried out on the lists of the National Crime Agency is that 



14 

 

the true number of victims during 2013 is estimated at 11,300, or four times the numbers of 

detected victims (2,744).  

 

The case of the Netherlands 

In the Netherlands, CoMensha has been appointed as the official registration organization of 

all identified possible victims of human trafficking on behalf of the Dutch National 

Rapporteur. Ideally, all possible victims identified by any organization or person in the 

Netherlands should be reported to CoMensha. Institutions authorized to carry out criminal 

investigations into human trafficking are: the National Police (comprising ten regional police 

districts and one central police unit) coming across all forms of trafficking, the Border Police 

typically coming across cross-border (sex) trafficking, and the Inspectorate Social Affairs and 

Employment (Inspectorate SZW) typically coming across cases of labour exploitation. There 

is no legal obligation for these institutions to report victims they have identified to CoMensha 

but they are strongly urged to do so. In addition, designated regional coordinators and other 

governmental as well as non-governmental institutions – such as organizations providing 

services to victims/migrants/prostitutes specifically; organizations providing social or legal 

services; and youth welfare agencies – are invited to report on all cases of presumed 

victimization. Finally, concerned citizens (or even victims themselves) can identify possible 

victims and report them to CoMensha directly. Although this system has been in place for 

several years already, and reporting and registering has steadily improved, it can still not be 

assumed that every identified possible victim in the Netherlands is always duly reported. In 

order to report to CoMensha, the organizations/persons that come across potential victims 

should (1) be capable of identifying possible victimization (be capable of recognizing and 

interpreting signals); (2) be aware of CoMensha as the national registration organization; (3) 

be willing to report to CoMensha/acknowledge the importance of reporting (youth welfare 

agencies are much more reluctant to report to CoMensha than for example service providing 

organizations specialized in human trafficking victims) and; (4) be able to report to 

CoMensha (with regard to consent of the presumed victim to reporting, that is currently 

required for privacy reasons, especially when it concerns minors). These are not constant 

omnipresent factors, they vary per organization/person, per region, in time et cetera and might 

constitute possible limitations in MSE-based estimation.   

In the CoMensha registration covering 2014, a total of 1,561 uniquely defined cases were 

registered once or more. In roughly one in eighteen cases, victims have been reported by more 

than one organization, usually two, and in a few cases three. Many of the theoretically 



15 

 

possible combinations of two lists occurred. Using this contingency table, Van Dijk and Van 

der Heijden (2016) applied log-linear models to estimate the dark figure of victims not 

recorded on any of the lists. Six lists were used: P = National Police; K = Border Police; I = 

Inspectorate SZW; R = regional coordinators; O = residential treatment centers and shelters; Z 

= others (for example, ambulatory care centers, organizations providing legal services, 

Immigration and Naturalization Service). A model search was carried out using the stepwise 

selection procedure of the R-package STEP. This procedure is similar to well-known stepwise 

regression analyses, that is, it starts with a simple model and includes significant and deletes 

non-significant interaction terms between the lists until the fit of the model to the data is 

deemed adequate.  

In Table 2, the first five models are reported. The standard approach for goodness-of-fit 

assessment of these models is to evaluate the chi-squared value based on the deviance in 

combination with the degrees of freedom through the Aikake Information Criterion (AIC) or 

the Bayesian Information Criterion (BIC). Considering the relatively large sample size of 

1,561 cases, the  BIC was chosen, which better prevents overfitting. For the data at hand, the 

goodness-of-fit assessment of the BIC model is still problematic because of the many empty 

cells (there are no observations for certain combinations of registers), as a result of which the 

chi-squared approximation does not hold. As an alternative, the parametric bootstrap was used 

to simulate the chi-squared distribution, and determined the p-value of the model as percentile 

in the simulated distribution. 20,000 random samples were simulated under the fitted model to 

estimate the distribution of the Pearson chi-square, and took the percentile of the chi-square of 

the fitted model as the p-value. For example, the third model in Table 2 (M3) has a chi-square 

value of 66, and the Pearson values of approximately 2,600 simulated samples were larger 

than this value, which corresponds to 13 per cent. This shows that the M3 fits adequately, 

because 13 per cent is larger than the significance level of 5 per cent.   

A first analysis looked at a model assuming independence of all lists (Model M1). This model 

showed an inadequate fit (the p-value is smaller than .05).  In subsequent models, interactions 

have been fitted between the residential treatment centers and shelters and others and between 

the Inspectorate SZW and others. Models M2 and M3 showed better fits (with the latter 

having a p-value above .05). Models fitting more interactions proved to be overfitting, that is, 

they were more complicated than necessary to describe the data well which may result in 

unstable estimates. The fit of model 3 is adequate (p = 0.130), and the p-values of models 4 

and 5 are not substantially better. Therefore, model 4 and 5 were ignored. The preferred 



16 

 

model 3 was the model fitting the interactions between the residential treatment centers and 

shelters and others (OZ) and between the Inspectorate SZW and others (IZ). 

 

Table 2: Results of log-linear modelling of six lists of human trafficking victims in the 

Netherlands, 2014  

         Estim    Confidence Interv.  Pearson       p 

M1. P,R,K,O,I,Z      10,542       (8,802  - 12,956)      577 .007 

M2. P,R,K,OZ,I   15,711 (12,552  – 20,576) 226 .017 

M3. P,R,K,OZ,IZ  17,812 (14,026  – 23,874) 66 .130 

M4. R,K,OP,OZ,IZ  22,270    (16,871   –  32,275) 49 .175 

M5. K,PR,OP,OZ,IZ  32,646    (22,299   –  56,048) 46 .173 

Source: Van Dijk & van der Heijden, 2016. 

 

As can be seen, the preferred model 3 gives an estimate of about 17,800 victims. These 

17,800 victims include the 1,560 recorded by CoMensha. The estimate suggests that roughly 

ten per cent of all victims were detected. Or, in other words, that there were approximately ten 

times more victims present on the Dutch territory in the course of 2014 than those recorded. 

The 95 per cent confidence interval ranges from approximately 14,000 to 24,000.  

 

5 A model with six or five lists, four covariates and data from six years 

As discussed above, one of the agreed global statistical indicators for SDG Target 16.2 to end 

abuse, exploitation, trafficking and all forms of violence against and torture of children 

consists of the number of victims of human trafficking per 100,000, disaggregated by sex, age 

and form of exploitation. The proposed disaggregation serves, inter alia, to inform anti-human 

trafficking policies. Victims of cross-border (sex) trafficking are typically identified by border 

police units during transportation (while entering the Netherlands). During exploitation, 

victims of sexual exploitation (Dutch or non-Dutch) are typically identified by special police 

forces and service providing NGOs. Victims of forced labour are mostly identified by 

Inspectorates for fair, healthy and safe working conditions or NGOs advancing migrant rights. 

Underage victims can be detected by a variety of organizations including youth welfare 

agencies. Ideally, each of these institutions needs to be informed about the total numbers of 

victims, identified and non identified, and on the proportions of potential clients reached by 

them.  



17 

 

The disaggregation of estimated numbers of undetected victims by gender, age, form of 

exploitation and nationality does not only serve important policy purposes but can also, as 

will be explained hereafter, improve the overall estimates themselves. A well-documented 

complication of the MSE method is that the likelihood of persons to be listed or included can 

vary across subgroups of the population. In the analogy of estimating numbers of fishes, some 

species might have larger chances of getting caught than others. If these subgroups’ 

probabilities are structurally different, the condition of homogeneity of inclusion chances is 

violated. In such cases, estimates based on average probabilities might result in erroneous 

estimates (Van der Heijden et al., 2012; Van der Heijden et al., 2015).  

The phenomenon of human trafficking manifests itself in a multitude of different forms. Four 

main types can be distinguished: internal trafficking for sexual exploitation, cross-border 

trafficking for sexual exploitation, internal trafficking for non-sexual exploitation and cross 

border trafficking for non-sexual exploitation.7 Each of these sub-types might have different 

capture (inclusion) probabilities. For example, Dutch victims of sexual exploitation may have 

different capture (inclusion) probabilities than non-Dutch victims of labour exploitation, 

because, inter alia, different sets of organizations are involved in their identification (Kragten-

Heerdink, Dettmeijer-Vermeulen & Korf, 2017).  

The condition of homogeneous inclusion probabilities on at least one of the lists can be 

approximated by stratification of the analysis according to relevant covariates. If, for 

example, certain categories of victims are more likely to be recorded than others, estimates 

can, and should, be made for each of these groups of victims separately (Van der Heijden et 

al, 2012).  

For policy purposes the CoMensha registration includes the covariates age, sex, form of 

exploitation experienced by the victim (for example, sexual services, forced labour or forced 

crime) and nationality. In the reports of the Dutch National Rapporteur the numbers of 

victims presented are broken down by these variables. In the initial study using the 2014 data 

on identified victims, the modeling did not, as presented above, include any covariate. The 

                                                        
7 Note that according to Kragten-Heerdink, Dettmeijer-Vermeulen & Korf (2017) the different types of 

trafficking are based on the ‘form of exploitation’ (sexual or non-sexual) times the ‘route of trafficking’ based on 

the country of recruitment and the country of exploitation (internal or – arrived/departed/traversed - cross-

border). Because in the Netherlands the registration of the country of recruitment and the country of exploitation 

is for the most part lacking, the route of trafficking is based on the nationality of the victims instead. This is 

legitimate because Dutch victims are all/predominantly victims of internal trafficking and non-Dutch victims are 

all/predominantly victims of cross-border trafficking. However, note that nationality/country of origin can only 

determine the route of trafficking (internal or cross-border) in countries where cross-border trafficking 

exclusively/predominantly involves cross-border trafficking from other countries to the country in question, i.e. 

arrived cross-border trafficking (instead of (also) from the country in question to other countries, i.e. departed 

cross-border trafficking). 



18 

 

present round of estimations of the total number of victims (detected and undetected), 

incorporates in the log-linear models the covariates male/female, adult/minor, sexual 

exploitation/other forms of exploitation and Dutch/non-Dutch. In order to increase the number 

of cases and to explore changes over time of the estimated numbers of victims (detected and 

undetected), data on presumed victims from six consecutive years, 2010 up to 2015 have been 

incorporated. An integrated dataset with these variables was prepared by the Dutch National 

Rapporteur.  

As mentioned before (see 2: An international definition allowing a range of interpretations), 

the Dutch definition of trafficking included a type of trafficking that is not informed by the 

Palermo Protocol (under Article 273f (1)(3) DCC): the recruiting, taking or abducting of a 

person with the intention of inducing that person to be  available for, in brief, prostitution, in 

another country, while no means nor the intention to exploitation is required. Research into 

the human trafficking case files of the Border Police conducted by the Dutch National 

Rapporteur, showed that the victims reported to CoMensha by the Border Police 

predominantly concern presumed victims of this particular type of trafficking (Nationaal 

Rapporteur, 2014). To allow for better international comparisons, and because this type of 

trafficking without the requirement of any means or the intention of exploitation, is no longer 

upheld as human trafficking by the Supreme Court8 in the Netherlands, two MSE-based 

models were developed. In the first analysis, all  8,2349 reported presumed victims in the 

period 2010-2015 were included, and used the same six lists as before: P = National Police; K 

= Border Police; I = Inspectorate SZW; R = regional coordinators; O = residential treatment 

centers and shelters; Z = others (such as ambulatory care centers, organizations providing 

legal services and Immigration and Naturalization Service). In the second analysis, the 

presumed victims who were solely reported by the Border Police were excluded, and 

therefore used five of the aforementioned six lists (excluding K = Border Police), concerning 

6,935 reported presumed victims in the period 2010-2015. Figure 1 shows the trends in the 

numbers of presumed victims reported to CoMensha by the six organizations just mentioned. 

 

 

 

                                                        
8 Supreme Court 17 May 2016, ECLI:NL:HR:2016:857. 
9 In total 8,245 presumed victims were reported to CoMensha in 2010-2015 (Nationaal Rapporteur, 2016). 11 

victims were excluded because the reporting organizations were not registered. 



19 

 

Figure 1: Numbers of presumed victims reported to CoMensha by six organizations or 

sets of organizations during the years 2010-2015 

 

 

Figure 1 shows at a glance that the National Police reported the largest part of all victims in 

all years. The second feature that catches the eye is that the numbers reported by the National 

Police peaked in 2011 and 2012 and the numbers reported by the Border Police in 2012. After 

2012, the numbers reported by the National Police and by the Border Police have both moved 

downwards.  

 

In order to give further insight in the statistics underpinning the model, Table 3 presents  the 

distribution of the 8,234 victims over the six lists, broken down to the occurring 

combinations. In the far right column the frequencies are given for the 6,935 victims that were 

not solely reported by the Border Police. 

 

Table 3: Contingency table for CoMensha registration on presumed victims,* 2010-2015  

I 

(Inspector

ate SZW) 

K  

(Borde

r 

Police) 

O  

(residential 

centers/shelt

ers) 

P 

(Nation

al 

Police) 

R  

(regional 

coordinato

rs) 

Z 

(other

s) 

frequen

cy 

(N=8,23

4) 

frequen

cy 

(N=6,93

5) 

        

X  X X   4 4 

X  X    1 1 

X   X  X 4 4 

X   X   18 18 

X    X  3 3 

X     X 16 16 



20 

 

X      352 352 

 X X    1 - 

 X  X   44 - 

 X    X 4 - 

 X     1,299 - 

  X X X  2 2 

  X X  X 7 7 

  X X   59 59 

  X  X  2 2 

  X   X 57 57 

  X    403 404 

   X X X 1 1 

   X X  82 82 

   X  X 125 125 

   X   4,466 4,510 

    X X 2 2 

    X  650 650 

     X 632 636 

398 1,348 536 4,812 742 848   

 

*Each row shows the number of cases which fall in the combination of lists indicated by the cells marked. Rows 

corresponding to patterns which do not occur in the observed data are omitted. 

 

The cells in the bottom row of Table 3 show the totals recorded by each of the six sets of 

organizations. By far the largest numbers are recorded by the National Police and the Border 

Police. The cells in the column ‘frequency (N=8,234)’ show the total number of cases falling 

into each of the occurring combinations. The largest categories of victims are those 

exclusively listed by the National Police (4,466), the Border Police (1,299), the regional 

coordinators (650), and others (632). The most common pairwise combinations were National 

Police and others (125), National Police and regional coordinators (82), National Police and 

residential centres/shelters (59), residential centres/shelters and others (57) and National 

Police and Border Police (44).  

It is noticeable that of the 1,348 cases reported by the Border Police, only 49, or 3.6 per cent, 

have been co-recorded by another organization, mainly the National Police (44). There is little 

overlap between the cases recorded by the Border Police and those recorded elsewhere. This 

validates the aforementioned observation that the Border Police identifies and reports a 

different type of trafficking than the other five reporting organizations; that is, a particular 

type of trafficking that is not informed by the Palermo Protocol and is no longer upheld as 



21 

 

human trafficking by the Supreme Court in the Netherlands. Between 2010 and 2015, the 

cases exclusively reported by the Border Police showed a pronounced curved trend. These 

cases amounted to only 39 and 22 in 2010 and 2011 respectively. Thereafter they went up to 

427 in 2012, 325 in 2013 and 314 in 2014. Subsequently they decreased to 172 in 2015. The 

sudden rise in reported cases by the Border Police is explained by the fact that in 2012 the 

Border Police considerably stepped up its efforts to identify presumed victims of the 

aforementioned particular type of trafficking. The recent drop in 2015 has probably to do with 

increased attention required by other established priorities (for example human smuggling) at 

the expense of available capacity to identify signals of human trafficking (Nationaal 

Rapporteur, 2016).  

The model selection procedure was basically the same as for the models presented in Table 2. 

The model search started with a simple model and included interaction terms until the fit of 

the model to the data became adequate. As explained, this time the additional variables age 

(L), sex (S), exploitation (U), nationality (N), and year (Q) were included. The variable Q 

comprises 5 polynomial variables from the 1st to 5th degree, which model potential trends in 

the main effects of and interactions between the registers and covariates over the years. The 

missing values on the covariates age (256), sex (3), exploitation (689) and nationality (103) 

were imputed using the EM algorithm (Van der Heijden, et al., 2009).  

In the STEP procedure, the BIC was again preferred over the AIC as the selection criterion, 

because of its protection against overfitting when the sample is relatively large, and an 

additional restriction on the parameters of the model was imposed. Given that many pairs of 

registers show little or no overlap over the six-year period (see Table 3), the 3-factor 

interaction parameters for such pairs of registers and the variable Q with the five polynomials 

for modelling trends over time are numerically unstable in the sense that they lead to highly 

inflated population size estimates and confidence intervals. To protect against this type of 

inflation, the restriction that only 2-factor interactions are allowed to enter the model was 

imposed. This restriction implies that no corrections are made for possible higher order 

interactions between the lists.  

Evaluation of the fit of the selected model by empirically generating the distribution of the 

Pearson chi-square statistic using the parametric bootstrap with 20,000 samples, shows that 

the STEP procedure selects a model that may be underfitting: the p-value is .038. However, it 

should be noted that the observed n is rather large with 8,234 or 6,935 cases, and it is well 

known that with such large n even minor misspecifications make a test for model fit 



22 

 

significant. Therefore, the 5-per cent criterion is not rigorously applied, but rather, the current 

model is chosen as its fit is adequate in the light of the large n. 

 

The model with six lists (concerning 8,234 presumed victims) that was selected as the most 

parsimonious one is presented in Table 4a, and the model with five lists (concerning 6,935 

presumed victims) in Table 4b. 

 

Table 4a: Parameters in the selected model with six lists 

KP, KR, KZ, KO, RZ 

IQ, KQ, OQ, RQ, ZQ, UQ, NQ,  

IU, IL, IN, IS, KN, KS, KU, KL, OL, ZL, UN, ZN, ON, OZ, OU, PN, PU, RU 

SL, SN, SU, LN, LU, PL, RL, OS, ZS 

 

Table 4b: Parameters in the selected model with five lists 

RZ 

IQ, OQ, RQ, ZQ, UQ, LQ, 

IU, IL, IN, IS, OL, ZL, UN, ZN, ON, OZ, OU, PN, PU, RU 

SL, SN, SU, LN, LU, PL, RL, OS, ZS  

 

The first row in both tables show the interactions between registers for which corrections have 

been made. As explained, interactions between lists can be both positive and negative. Notice 

that in Table 4a this part of the model is considerably more complicated than the model for 

2014.10 This may simply be due to the fact that a larger number of observed cases makes it 

easier to detect such interactions (n = 1,561 in 2014 versus n = 8,234 in 2010-2015) and the 

inclusion of covariates. The model in Table 4b is similar to the model in Table 4a – it includes 

the same interactions except of course the (negative) interactions between list K (Border 

Police) and others – but does lead to slightly lower estimates for some years (see for example 

Figure 2a and 2b).  

 

 

 

 

                                                        
10 See Van Dijk, J.J.M. and P.G.M. van der Heijden (2016), Research Brief. Multiple Systems Estimation for 

estimating the number of victims of human trafficking across the world. Vienna: UNODC. 



23 

 

Results overall 

Figure 2 (a and b) shows in black the trend in the total presumed victims recorded by 

CoMensha and in red the total estimated numbers of victims. The 95 per cent confidence 

interval around the estimates is depicted in shaded red. 

 

Figure 2: Trends in observed presumed victims and estimated totals of presumed 

victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 (a: based on model with six lists, b: based on 

model with five lists)  

 

In Figure 2a the numbers of observed presumed victims depicted at the bottom show a peak at 

about 1,700 in 2012. The trend line of estimated total victims does roughly mirror the one in 

observed cases. The trend lines, however, seem to show some divergences. Unlike the 

observed numbers, the estimated numbers seem to have jumped up between 2010 and 2011. 

The downward trend from 2012 onwards is steeper in the estimated numbers than in the 

observed cases.  

In Figure 2b the clear peak in observed presumed victims is absent, which means that this 

peak in Figure 2a is the result of observed presumed victims of the particular type of 

trafficking reported by the Border Police. However, in Figure 2b the trend line of the 

estimated total seems to peak in 2011 and – as in Figure 2a - in 2012 (although the 2012 peak 

is a bit lower: Figure 2a: about 8,700 versus Figure 2b: about 8,400). As opposed to the peak 

in the observed number in 2012 (in Figure 2a), the peak in the estimated number in 2012 (in 

both Figure 2a and 2b) is therefore probably not exclusively related to the inclusion of the 

aforementioned particular type of trafficking reported by the Border Police. 



24 

 

As discussed, the earlier one-year model for 2014 without covariates produced an estimate of 

17,800 with confidence intervals between 14,000 and 23,900. The new – fuller and more 

complex - model estimates the totals of victims in 2014 at around 7,000. The new estimate is 

considerably lower than the older estimate and falls outside its 95 per cent confidence 

interval.  

The difference is partly explained by the inclusion of more years in the model, which may 

have smoothed the findings. The second probable explanation is the use of covariates in the 

new model. This explanation was put to the test by replicating the six year model without 

covariates. This simpler model produced estimates per year that indeed differed considerably 

from those of the full model (see appendix A1 for results for all years). For the year 2014 the 

new estimated number was 10,500. For this year the multi-year model without covariates 

apparently produced a higher estimate than the fuller model.  

 

Observed and estimated numbers 

As shown in Table 5, the estimated numbers of presumed victims are five to six times higher 

than the numbers of observed victims (see appendix A2 for full data). 

 

Table 5: Ratio between estimated and detected victims, 2010-2015 

 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 

Six lists 5.5 6.5 5.1 5.0 4.5 4.5 

Five lists 5.8 7.0 6.6 6.4 5.4 5.1 

 

Over the period of 2010-2015, the hidden figure of trafficking victims seems to have declined 

somewhat according to both analyses.  

An MSE using covariates provides insight in the ratios between estimated and observed 

presumed victims per group. The ratios for 2010 up to 2015 for the subgroups of victims of 

sexual exploitation and of non-sexual exploitation are shown in Tables 6 and 7 (see Appendix 

A2). 

 

Table 6: Ratio between estimated and detected victims of sexual exploitation, 2010-2015 

 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 

Six lists 5.2 5.4 4.6 4.6 3.9 4.1 

Five lists 5.6 6.0 6.2 6.1 4.9 4.8 

 



25 

 

Table 7: Ratio between estimated and detected victims of non-sexual exploitation, 

2010-2015 
 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 

Six lists 7.4 10.4 7.8 7.8 6.8 5.6 

Five lists 7.6 11.0 8.2 8.1 7.0 5.7 

 

On average, the ratios between estimated and observed cases were 1.6 (six lists) / 1.4 (five 

lists) times higher for presumed victims of non-sexual as for those of sexual exploitation. In 

other words, the hidden part of non-sexual exploitation, in the Netherlands mainly consisting 

of labour exploitation, is 1.6/1.4 times higher than that of exploitation in the sex industry. 

Figure 3 conveys the results graphically (observed cases represented by dotted lines). 

 

Figure 3: Trends in observed presumed victims and estimated totals of presumed 

victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 by form of exploitation (sexual/other) (a: based on 

model with six lists, b: based on model with five lists) 

  a       b 

 

 

Figure 3 (a and b) conveys, first, that the numbers of estimated cases of sexual and non-sexual 

exploitation seem to follow different trends. Cases of sexual exploitation show a curved trend 

with a peak in 2012. Cases of non-sexual exploitation seem to have peaked in 2011. The 

ratios between estimated and observed cases are consistently smaller for sexual exploitation 

than for non-sexual exploitation over the years. 

The trend lines of observed and estimated numbers of non-sexual exploitation in Figure 3a 

correspond to those in Figure 3b. The lines for sexual exploitation show some differences. As 



26 

 

opposed to Figure 3a, the number of observed cases does not clearly peak in 2012 in Figure 

3b. Furthermore, the number of estimated cases of sexual exploitation in 2011 seems higher in 

Figure 3b than in Figure 3a. These estimated cases of sexual exploitation seem to peak in 

2012 in both Figure 3a and 3b, although the peak in Figure 3b is a bit lower. 

 

Next, possible differences between the ratios between estimated and observed cases for the 

covariates of sex, age and nationality have been examined. In the model based on six lists the 

relative dark figures of male victims are comparable to those of female victims (on average 1 

out of 4.8 male victims is observed, and 1 out of 5.2 female victims). In the model based on 

five lists however, the relative dark figure of female victims (1 out of 6.3 female victims is 

observed) is higher than that of male victims (1 out of 4.9 male victims is observed). The 

results also show that the ratios between estimated and observed cases are 1.7 (six lists) / 1.5 

(five lists) times as high for underage victims as for adult victims. The victimization of minors 

of both sexual and non-sexual exploitation seems to be more hidden than that of adults.11 

Finally, the dark figure ratios for Dutch and non-Dutch nationals is considered separately. 

These results show that non-Dutch victims are 2.8 (six lists) / 2.5 (five lists) times as likely to 

be detected, or at least reported, than Dutch victims (for full results see appendix A2, A3, A4 

and A5). 

 

Estimations disaggregated by sex, age, form of exploitation and nationality 

 

Before portraying the other key results in graphs, first, the breakdowns of the estimated total 

numbers of victims by sex, age, form of exploitation and nationality are presented below in a 

summary table (Table 8). In every cell, two numbers are presented: the first number 

represents the estimate based on the model with six lists, and the second number, the estimate 

based on five lists. 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                        
11 Since the numbers of victims in these subcategories of underage victims are very small, the results have not 

been included. 



27 

 

Table 8: MSE-based estimates based on respectively six and five lists of the population 

of presumed victims of human trafficking in the Netherlands in 2010-2015 (x 1000), 

totals and disaggregated by year, sex, age, form of exploitation and nationality (first 

figure refers to six list and second figure to five lists) 

 

 female male minor adult sexual other     Dutch non-

Dutch 

total 

2010 4.9/5.0 0.6/0.6 1.6/1.3 3.9/4.2 4.5/4.6 1.0/1.0 3.1/3.3 2.4/2.2 5.5/5.6 

2011 6.5/7.1 1.4/1.3 2.0/1.9 5.9/6.5 5.3/5.6 2.7/2.8 3.7/4.6 4.2/3.8 7.9/8.4 

2012 7.5/7.3 1.1/1.1 2.4/2.2 6.3/6.2 6.6/6.3 2.1/2.2 4.7/4.9 3.9/3.5 8.7/8.4 

2013 6.4/6.3 0.8/0.8 2.1/2.6 5.1/4.5 5.7/5.6 1.5/1.5 4.4/4.4 2.8/2.7 7.2/7.1 

2014 6.0/5.7 1.1/1.0 1.9/1.9 5.1/4.8 4.9/4.6 2.1/2.1 3.8/3.8 3.2/2.9 7.0/6.7 

2015 5.0/4.8 1.0/1.0 1.7/2.1 4.2/3.8 4.0/3.8 2.0/2.0 3.4/3.3 2.5/2.6 5.9/5.8 

 

The results given in Table 8 indicate a strong overrepresentation of females among the 

estimated total numbers of victims in all years. Since 2012, the numbers of female victims 

have declined as opposed to the number of males.  

The estimated numbers of underage victims fluctuate around 2,000 per year (in both models). 

Their proportion of the total is on average 28/29 per cent (six/five lists). 

The estimated numbers of victims of non-sexual exploitation also centered around 2,000 in 

the period 2012 – 2015. In these years, the proportion of victims of non-sexual exploitation 

has increased somewhat (from 24 per cent (six lists) / 26 per cent (five lists) in 2012 to 33 per 

cent (six lists) / 34 per cent (five lists) in 2015). Finally, it can be observed that Dutch victims 

are in the majority with the exception of 2011 in the model with six lists when the numbers of 

non-Dutch victims surpassed those of Dutch victims.  

In comparison to the estimated numbers based on the model with six lists (the first numbers 

given in each cell), the estimated numbers based on the model with five lists (the second 

numbers) include, as from 2012, less females, adults, victims of sexual exploitation and non-

Dutch victims (the latter with the exception of 2015). This corresponds to the fact that the 

particular type of trafficking reported by the Border Police by definition concerns cross-

border trafficking for sexual exploitation which involves predominantly female victims 

(because of the required element of sexual exploitation), adults, and non-Dutch (because of 

the required cross-border element). 

 



28 

 

Graphs with estimated rates  

The following figures will graphically present the trends in estimated numbers of the various 

subgroups defined by age, sex, form of exploitation and nationality (for absolute numbers see 

appendices A2 to A5).  

Figure 3, above, showed the separate trends for sexual and non-sexual exploitation. These will 

not be repeated. Figure 4 depicts the trends in female and male victims. The distribution 

according to gender roughly resembles that of form of exploitation, with few male victims of 

sexual exploitation. The 95 per cent confidence intervals are shown in shaded colours. 

 

Figure 4: Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 

by sex (female/male) (a: based on model with six lists, b: based on model with five lists) 

 

As expected, the trend lines in both Figure 4a and 4b of female victims closely resemble the 

ones for sexual exploitation. The estimated numbers of female victims seem to have peaked in 

2012 and thereafter gradually declined to the 2010-level in 2015. The estimated numbers of 

male victims seem to have remained fairly stable over the years, although the trend lines in 

both models show a peak in 2011 that relates to the estimated cases of non-sexual exploitation 

(see Figure 3a and 3b). 

The trend line of male victims in Figure 4a corresponds to that in Figure 4b.  The trend lines 

of females, however, show some differences. In Figure 4b the number of estimated females 

seems higher, and as expected, in comparison to Figure 4a, Figure 4b shows, as from 2012 

somewhat fewer female victims.    

Figure 5 shows the separate trends in estimated numbers of adult and underage victims. 



29 

 

Figure 5: Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 

by age (minor/adult) (a: based on model with six lists, b: based on model with five lists) 

 

On average, underage victims make up at least a quarter of all victims in both models, varying 

between 26 per cent in 2011 and 29 per cent in 2010, 2013 and 2015 based on the model with 

six lists, and between 23 per cent in 2011 and 37 per cent in 2013 based on the model with 

five lists. The trend lines of estimated numbers of adult victims roughly mirror the curved 

trend in victims of sexual exploitation discussed above. The trends in underage victims seem 

to show less variation. 

The two trend lines in Figure 5a largely correspond to those in Figure 5b, with the exception 

that adults peak in 2011 according to Figure 5b, instead of in 2012 (as in Figure 5a), and 

minors peak in 2013 according to Figure 5b, instead of in 2012 (as in Figure 5a). As expected, 

in comparison to Figure 5a, Figure 5b shows, as from 2012 somewhat fewer adult victims.    

The next figures (Figure 6a and 6b) show the results for the four demographic subgroups 

defined by the covariates of sex and age.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



30 

 

Figure 6 Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015, 

by sex (female/male) and age (minor/adult) (a: based on model with six lists, b: based on 

model with five lists) 

The disaggregation by age and sex reveals that both adult and underage victims of human 

trafficking are predominantly female. The trend line of adult females confirms the now 

familiar curve with peaks in 2011 (five lists) and, 2012 (six lists). As expected, in comparison 

to Figure 6a, Figure 6b shows as from 2012 somewhat fewer adult females. The numbers of 

girls also seem to have peaked in 2012 in the model with six lists, but based on the model 

with five lists in 2013, as opposed to adult females. The subcategories of males seem to have 

stayed fairly stable over the years, although the trend lines of adult males in both models seem 

to show a peak in 2011 that relates to the peak of estimated cases of non-sexual exploitation 

(see Figure 3a and 3b). 

Figure 7 shows the results for the subgroups defined by sex and form of exploitation. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



31 

 

Figure 7 Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 

by sex (female/male) and form of exploitation (sexual/other) (a: based on model with six 

lists, b: based on model with five lists) 

 

Figure 7 confirms that female victims of sexual exploitation make up the bulk of all victims in 

all years and seem to have peaked in 2012. The estimations indicate that the victims of 

sexual exploitation are rarely males (only 5 per cent in both models). Numbers of such 

victims, represented by the blue line, seem to have remained at a very low level in all years. 

Male and female victims of non-sexual exploitation seem to show very similar trend lines, 

with a peak in 2011 (which relates to Figure 3a and 3b). 

As expected, in comparison to Figure 7a, Figure 7b shows, as from 2012, somewhat fewer 

female victims of sexual exploitation. 

Figure 8 depicts the separate trends in estimates of victims of sexual and non-sexual 

exploitation disaggregated by age.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



32 

 

Figure 8 Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 

by age (minor/adult) and form of exploitation (sexual/other) (a: based on model with six 

lists, b: based on model with five lists) 

 

Figure 8 shows that the estimated numbers of the four categories of victims defined by age 

and form of exploitation each followed somewhat different trends. Estimated adult victims of 

sexual exploitation, mostly comprising females, seem to have peaked in 2012 and adult 

victims of non-sexual exploitation in 2011 (which relates to Figure 3a and 3b). The numbers 

of estimated underage victims of both sexual and non-sexual exploitation, for example, 

trafficking for criminal activities or forced begging, seem to show less pronounced changes 

over time since 2010. However, both trend lines in Figure 8a seem to follow those of adult 

victims in a somewhat flattened way: underage victims of sexual exploitation show a small 

peak in 2012 (also relating to the peak of girls in Figure 6a), and underage victims of non-

sexual exploitation in 2011.  

As expected, in comparison to Figure 8a, Figure 8b shows, as from 2012, somewhat fewer 

adult victims of sexual exploitation. 

 

Estimations disaggregated by nationality 

As explained, the estimation model included the covariates mentioned in the relevant 

indicator of the SDG Target 16.2 (age, sex and form of exploitation). In the Netherlands a 

large part of presumed victims of sexual exploitation recorded in recent years are Dutch 

victims of internal trafficking for sexual exploitation (Nationaal Rapporteur, 2016). For the 

reasons mentioned before, the Dutch National Rapporteur suggested to include as fourth 

covariate the dichotomous variable Dutch nationals/non-Dutch nationals. Figure 9 shows the 



33 

 

observed and estimated numbers of presumed victims for the years 2010-2015 disaggregated 

by nationality (for details see Appendix A4).  

 

Figure 9 Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 

by nationality (Dutch/non-Dutch) (a: based on model with six lists, b: based on model 

with five lists) 

 

Figure 9 shows that the estimated numbers of presumed victims with Dutch nationality seem 

to have peaked in 2012, which relates to sexual exploitation (see Figure 3a and 3b). This 

confirms the assumption mentioned before (below Figure 2), about the peak in 2012 not being 

(exclusively) related to the particular type of trafficking reported by the Border Police 

(concerning female, adult, non-Dutch victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation). Instead, 

it turns out to be mostly related to (female) Dutch victims (of sexual exploitation). The 

numbers of estimated victims with non-Dutch nationality show the by now familiar peak in 

2011 (and 2012), relating to non-sexual exploitation (see Figure 3a and 3b).  

As expected, in comparison to Figure 9a, Figure 9b shows somewhat fewer non-Dutch 

victims (except for 2015).  

Figure 10 shows the trends in the four categories defined by the variables nationality and form 

of exploitation. 

 

 



34 

 

Figure 10 Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 

by sex (female/male) and nationality (Dutch/non-Dutch) (a: based on model with six 

lists, b: based on model with five lists) 

 

The results indicate that the estimated numbers of Dutch victims peaked in 2012 whereas the 

non-Dutch victims peaked in 2011 (and 2012) (see Figure 9). This finding highlights the 

peaking of the numbers of Dutch female victims in 2012 and of non-Dutch female victims in 

2011 and 2012. The numbers of non-Dutch male victims also seem to have peaked in 2011, 

thereby contributing to the overall peak of non-Dutch victims in that year. 

As expected, in comparison to Figure 10a, Figure 10b shows somewhat fewer non-Dutch 

female victims.  

Figure 11 shows the results for Dutch victims of sexual exploitation, non-Dutch victims of 

sexual exploitation, Dutch victims of other forms of exploitation and non-Dutch victims of 

other forms of exploitation.   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



35 

 

Figure 11 Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 

by form of exploitation (sexual/other) and nationality (Dutch/non-Dutch) (a: based on 

model with six lists, b: based on model with five lists) 

 

The results in Figure 11a show that Dutch victims of sexual exploitation seem to have peaked 

in 2012, non-Dutch victims of sexual exploitation in 2012 and non-Dutch victims of non-

sexual exploitation in 2011. Figure 11b shows similar trends, and as expected somewhat 

fewer non-Dutch victims of sexual exploitation. 

Finally, below are the breakdowns of the estimated numbers by age and nationality. 

 

Figure 12 Trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the Netherlands, 2010-2015 

by age (minor/adult) and nationality (Dutch/non-Dutch) (a: based on model with six 

lists, b: based on model with five lists) 

 



36 

 

The results show that adult non-Dutch victims seem to have peaked in 2011 (and 2012), and 

according to the model based on six lists, Dutch victims (both adults and minors) in 2012. 

According to the model based on five lists, however, adult Dutch victims seem to have 

peaked in 2011 (and 2012) and minor Dutch victims in 2013 (just as minors in Figure 5b, 

minor females in Figure 6b and minor victims of sexual exploitation in Figure 8b). As 

expected, in comparison to Figure 12a, Figure 12b shows, as from 2012, somewhat fewer 

non-Dutch adults. 

 

6 Conclusions and discussion 

The present study builds on the exploratory multiple systems estimation (MSE) by Silverman 

and Bales of the total numbers of presumed victims in the United Kingdom in 2013 based on 

data collected by various organizations, and the exploratory estimation of the numbers of 

presumed victims in the Netherlands recorded in 2014 (Van Dijk and van der Heijden, 2016). 

In the Netherlands, data on presumed victims are systematically reported by both involved 

state agencies and relevant NGOs to the NGO CoMensha on behalf of the Dutch National 

Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children. In the 

Dutch context, the concept of a presumed victim is defined as a person showing any signs of 

having possibly been trafficked/exploited, according to the broad definition of trafficking 

applied in the Netherlands. Persons with such status are entitled to special services and, when 

irregularly on the territory, protection from expulsion. 

In order to make the estimates more robust, firstly, all presumed victims identified by 

different organizations and reported to CoMensha over a period of six consecutive years have 

been included (2010-2015). In total six different groups of organizations (lists) reported to 

CoMensha, among which the Border Police. The presumed victims reported by the Border 

Police concern presumed victims of a particular type of trafficking that is not informed by the 

Palermo Protocol. Moreover, this type of trafficking is no longer upheld as human trafficking 

by the Supreme Court in the Netherlands. For these reasons, two log-linear models have been 

fitted: one including those reported by the Border Police (based on six lists, concerning 8,234 

presumed victims), and one excluding those exclusively reported by the Border Police (based 

on five lists, concerning 6,935 presumed victims).  

Secondly, to enhance the robustness of the estimates they have been stratified for covariates 

with possibly different inclusion chances, namely age (minor/adult), sex (female/male), form 

of exploitation (sexual/other) and nationality (Dutch/non-Dutch). The incorporation of these 

covariates allows the calculation of one of the official indicators for SDG Target 16.2, namely 



37 

 

(16.2.2) the number of victims per 100,000 inhabitants disaggregated by sex, age and form of 

exploitation. In addition, the model allows the calculation of estimated numbers of Dutch and 

non-Dutch victims. 

The key finding of this analysis is that in 2014 and 2015, the most recent years for which 

records are available, the total number of presumed victims of human trafficking in the 

Netherlands was approximately 6,500 (six lists) / 6,250 (five lists) per year. Expressed as 

rates per 100,000 population, the rate of presumed victims is about 38/37 (six/five lists) per 

100,000 inhabitants per year.12  

Disaggregated rates for sex, age and nationality should be calculated not per 100,000 

inhabitants but per 100,000 inhabitants of the relevant population groups. The rates per year 

(based on the estimates for 2014 and 2015) are 32/29 victims (six/five lists) per 100,000 adult 

Dutch females and 1 per 100,000 adult Dutch males (in both models).13 Assuming that no or 

very few victims of human trafficking in the Netherlands are younger than 12 years of age, 

the victimization rates of minors are: 235/257 (six/five lists) per 100,000 Dutch girls (between 

12-17 years old) and 14 (in both models) per 100,000 Dutch boys (between 12-17 years 

old).14 The rate of non-Dutch (legal or illegal) residents is 326/311 (six/five lists) victims per 

100,000, or about fifteen/fourteen (six/five lists) times higher than for Dutch nationals (22 in 

both models) per 100,000).15 

 

                                                        
12 According to Statistics Netherlands (in Dutch: CBS), in 2015 there were 16,900,726 legal residents with a 

Dutch or a non-Dutch nationality in the Netherlands and Van der Heijden, Cruyff and van Gils (2015) estimated 

that there were about 35,530 illegal residents in the Netherlands in the twelve month period July 2012 up to and 

including June 2013: which makes an estimated total of 16,936,256 residents (Dutch and non-Dutch, legal and 

illegal).  
13 According to Statistics Netherlands, in 2015 there were 16,053,457 legal residents with a Dutch nationality in 

the Netherlands (victimization rate of 22/22 (six/five lists) per 100,000 of the total Dutch population), of which 

12,750,976 adults (victimization rate of 17/15 (six/five lists) per 100,000 of the total adult Dutch population): 

6,486,646 females and 6,264,330 males. 
14 According to Statistics Netherlands, in 2015 there were 1,178,462 minors of twelve years or older with a 

Dutch nationality in the Netherlands (victimization rate of 122/133 (six/five lists) per 100,000 Dutch minors of 

twelve years or older, which is seven/nine (six/five lists) times higher than for Dutch adults): 576,043 girls and 

602,419 boys.   
15 According to Statistics Netherlands, in 2015 there were 847,269 legal residents with a non-Dutch nationality 

in the Netherlands and Van der Heijden, Cruyff and van Gils (2015) estimated that there were about 35,530 

illegal residents in the Netherlands in the twelve month period July 2012 up to and including June 2013: which 

makes an estimated total of 882,799 legal and illegal non-Dutch residents. Furthermore, there are about 754,259 

legal and illegal non-Dutch adult residents (victimization rate of 331/306 (six/five lists) per 100,000), of which 

376,373 females and 377,886 males (victimization rates of 481/430 (six/five lists) per 100,000 legal and illegal 

non-Dutch adult females, and 183/182 (six/five lists) per 100,000 legal and illegal non-Dutch adult males), and 

about 39,343 legal and illegal non-Dutch minors of twelve years or older (victimization rate of 954/1129 

(six/five lists) per 100,000), of which 18,835 girls and 20,508 boys (victimization rates of 1,205/1,436 (six/five 

lists) per 100,000 legal and illegal non-Dutch girls of twelve years or older, and 724/846 (six/five lists) per 

100,000 legal and illegal non-Dutch boys of twelve years or older). 



38 

 

In all years, female victims of sexual exploitation made up the largest part of the estimated 

total numbers of victims of human trafficking. However, these numbers seem to have 

somewhat declined since 2012. Almost all victims of sexual exploitation are females (on 

average 95 per cent in both models), and even the majority of victims of non-sexual 

exploitation are females (on average about 60 per cent is female in both models). The 

estimates indicate that male victims in the Netherlands are mostly victims of non-sexual 

exploitation. Only about a quarter of all males are victims of sexual exploitation, and they 

seem to account for only 5 per cent of all victims of sexual exploitation. However, since there 

is only a small number of observed male victims of sexual exploitation, the estimate for this 

subgroup has relatively large margins of error. 

Furthermore, it is concluded that underage victims make up more than a quarter of the total 

number of victims. The estimated number of (Dutch and non-Dutch) minors victimized by 

either sexual or non-sexual exploitation is in 2014 and 2015, at 149/165 (six/five lists) per 

100,000 persons in the age group of 12-17 years, staggeringly high. Finally, the study showed 

that in recent years among presumed victims of human trafficking Dutch nationals are in the 

majority.  

 

Interpreting trends 

The estimates of the total numbers of presumed victims during 2010-2015 show a curved 

trend. The numbers jumped from about 5,500 in 2010 (both models) to 7,900/8,400 (six/five 

lists) in 2011 and reached a plateau at 8,700/8,400 (six/five lists) in 2012. Thereafter the 

numbers dropped to 7,200/7,100 (six/five lists) in 2013, 7,000/6,700 (six/five lists) in 2014 

and 5,900/5,800 (six/five lists) in 2015. This curved trend roughly mirrors the movement in 

recorded victims including the victims reported by the Border Police (see Figure 2a). Note 

that the numbers of recorded victims excluding the victims exclusively reported by the Border 

Police, present a more or less steady line, without clear peaks. The apparent estimated peaks 

in 2011 and 2012 based on these observed cases (model with five lists) therefore do not 

mirror the number of recorded victims excluding the victims exclusively reported by the 

Border Police (see Figure 2b).  

The increase in the estimated number of victims in 2011 (in both models) seems for a large 

part (48 per cent/40 per cent) related to an increase in the estimated number of adult, non-

Dutch victims of non-sexual exploitation, both females and males.  

The peak in the estimated number in 2012 based on the model with six lists seems only to a 

limited extent accounted for by an increase in female, adult, non-Dutch victims of sexual 



39 

 

exploitation.  Female Dutch victims of sexual exploitation (both minors and adults) seem to 

be mostly accountable for the estimated increase in 2012. Also, in the model with five lists, 

female Dutch victims of sexual exploitation (both minors and adults) seemed to increase. 

However, this did not result into a considerable increase in the total number of victims in this 

year, for this increase did not (as opposed to the model with six lists) surpass the decrease in 

the number of victims of non-sexual exploitation. 

 

In conclusion 

The most recent available estimates of the total number of presumed victims of human 

trafficking in the Netherlands are the ones for 2014 and 2015, namely 7,000/6,700 (six/five 

lists) and 5,900/5,800 (six/five lists) respectively, or approximately 6,500/6,250 (six/five lists) 

victims on average per year, as discussed above.  

Since respectively 1,561/1,247 (six/five lists) and 1,321/1,149 (six/five lists) presumed 

victims were recorded in 2014 and 2015, this means that the estimated totals in the 

Netherlands of approximately 7,000/6,700 (six/five lists) and 5,900/5,800 (six/five lists) are 

four to five times higher than the recorded numbers (see Appendix A2 for details).  

 

Dark figure ratios 

MSE using models with covariates provides insight in the ratios between estimated and 

observed victims of the different subgroups. The findings reveal that this ratio is, consistently 

over the years, considerably higher for cases of non-sexual exploitation than for sexual 

exploitation (Appendix A2). Cases of non-sexual exploitation, in the Netherlands mainly 

consisting of labour exploitation in agriculture, the leisure industry, construction or the 

domestic sphere, are apparently more hidden than exploitation in the sex industry. The results 

also show that the exploitation of minors is in general less likely to be recorded than that of 

adults (Appendix A3). The policy implication of these results on the differential hidden 

figures is that the relevant organizations, notably the Inspectorate SZW and youth welfare 

agencies in the country, should step up their efforts to detect and report cases of labour 

exploitation and the exploitation of minors respectively. Finally, the results indicate lower 

detection rates for Dutch nationals than for non-Dutch nationals. This finding calls for 

sustained efforts of, inter alia, the Dutch police to detect cases of internal trafficking for 

sexual exploitation of Dutch women and girls. 

 

 



40 

 

The way forward 

The inclusion of covariates such as age, sex, form of exploitation and nationality is 

recommended for policy reasons. Anti-trafficking policies should ideally be informed by data 

on the separate trends in various sub categories of human trafficking and in trends in the 

varying detection rates/dark figure ratios per category.  

The breakdowns according to form of exploitation (sexual or non-sexual) and route of 

trafficking (internal or cross-border) – in the case of the Netherlands determined by 

nationality 16  – offer the possibility to improve international comparisons of estimated 

numbers by equalizing the definition of trafficking victims in these respects. If, for example, a 

country excludes victims of internal trafficking from its definition, both its recorded and 

MSE-estimated numbers of victims will be relatively low compared to those of other 

countries which cover exploitation of nationals. MSE cannot control for the use of widely 

divergent definitions of presumed or identified victims. International comparisons could be 

restricted to a common denominator such as the estimated numbers of victims of cross-border 

trafficking for sexual exploitation. Although such post hoc corrections in comparative MSE 

estimates seem feasible to some extent, further harmonization of definitions of human 

trafficking should remain a priority in future efforts to produce comparable international 

statistics regarding SDG Target 16.2 (Van Dijk & Van der Heijden, 2016). 

The inclusion of covariates where available is also important to increase the robustness of the 

overall estimates per country. The current estimate for 2014 of 7,000 (six lists) victims in the 

Netherlands is considerably lower than the older estimate of 17,800 based on a one-year 

model without covariates (also based on six lists). A replication of the new, multi-year model 

without covariates also produced an estimate for 2014 considerably above 7,000.17 These 

diverging findings suggest that inclusion of covariates such as age, sex, form of exploitation 

and nationality does, as expected, lead to different and more accurate estimates. The multi-

year results also show that estimates based on models incorporating covariates are more stable 

over time. For technical reasons inclusion of these covariates is therefore to be recommended 

in future MSE-based estimations of the numbers of trafficking victims to the extent that the 

available numbers of recorded cases allow for it.  

                                                        
16 Note that nationality/country of origin can only determine the route of trafficking (internal or cross-border) in 

countries where cross-border trafficking exclusively/predominantly involves cross-border trafficking from other 

countries to the country in question (instead of (also) from the country in question to other countries). 
17 The estimates of a model without covariates are consistently different from those of more complex models, 

though not necessarily always higher (see appendix A1). 



41 

 

The results also suggest that the use of larger, multi-year samples, although complicating the 

fitting of the models, ultimately produces more robust results. In countries were no historical 

data are available, multi-year models can be developed incrementally by replicating MSE 

studies in the future. 

The overall recommendation for future studies is to use, where possible, multi-year datasets 

with the covariates age, sex, and form of exploitation. In countries where both nationals and 

non-nationals are subject of anti-trafficking policies, the covariate of nationality should also 

be included. A requirement for the use of such complex models seems to be the availability of 

relatively large datasets. When using large datasets, the use of BIC for model selection and 

bootstrapping is recommended for assessing the goodness-of-fit of the models. In the 

goodness-of-fit assessment the requirement that p-values are higher than 0.05 can be relaxed 

in order to avoid overfitting.  

 

  



42 

 

References 

Abraham, M. & J.J.M.van Dijk (2017), Measuring Forced Labour Victimization among 

Bulgarians in the Netherlands, a pilot study commissioned by the ILO, Amsterdam: DSP 

Groep. 

 

Addington, L.A. & C.M. Rennison (2014), ‘US National Crime Victimization Survey,’ in 

Weisburd, D. & G. Bruinsma (eds), Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice,  

5392-5401, New York: Springer. 

 

Aromaa, K. (2007), ‘Trafficking in Human Beings: Uniform Definitions for Better Measuring 

and for Effective Counter-Measures.’ in: Savona E.U. and Stefanizzi S. (eds) Measuring 

Human Trafficking: Complexities and Pitfalls, 13-26, New York: Springer. 

 

Baillargeon S. and L-P. Rivest (2007), ‘Rcapture: Loglinear Models for Capture-Recapture in 

R,’ Journal of Statistical Software, 19.5.  

 

Bales, K., O. Hesketh & B. Silverman (2015), Modern slavery in the UK: How many victims? 

Significance, 12(3), 16-21.  

 

Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against 

Children (2012), Trafficking in Human Beings: Visible and Invisible: A Quantitative Report 

2007-2011. The Hague: Dutch National Rapporteur. 

 

Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against 

Children (2013), Trafficking in Human Beings: Ninth Report of the Dutch National 

Rapporteur. The Hague: Dutch National Rapporteur. 

 

Esser, L.B. & C.E. Dettmeijer-Vermeulen (2016), ‘The Prominent Role of National Judges in 

Interpreting the International Definition of Human Trafficking.’ Anti-Trafficking Review 6, 

91-105. 

 

Eurostat (2015), Statistical working papers: trafficking in human beings, 2015 edition, 

Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union. 

 



43 

 

Gallagher, A.T. (2010), The International Law of Human Trafficking. New York: Cambridge 

University Press. 

 

Gould, A.J., (2010), ‘From Pseudoscience to Protoscience: Estimating Human Trafficking 

and Modern Forms of Slavery,’ Second Annual Interdisciplinary Conference on Human 

Trafficking, 2010. 6. 

 

ILO (2012), Global Estimate of Forced Labour, Results and methodology, Geneva: 

International Labour Organization. 

 

International Working Group for Disease Monitoring and Forecasting (1995), ‘Capture-

recapture and multiple-record systems estimation I: History and theoretical development,’ 

American J Epidemiol. 1995 Nov 15;142 (10):1047-58. 

 

    Jansson, K. (2006), British Crime Survey: Measuring Crime for 25 Years: London: Home 

Office. 

 

Klaver, J., Leun, J. van der, & A. Schreijenberg, (2013), Preliminary study improper use of 

the residence scheme for victims of human trafficking, Regioplan Beleidsonderzoek, 

University Leiden - Section Criminology, WODC (full text in Dutch). 

 

Kragten-Heerdink, S. L.J., C.E. Dettmeijer-Vermeulen & D.J. Korf (2017), More Than Just 

“Pushing and Pulling”: Conceptualizing Identified Human Trafficking in the Netherlands. 

Crime & Delinquency. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1177/0011128717728503. 

 

Lum, K.  M. E. Price & D. Banks (2013), ‘Applications of Multiple Systems Estimation in 

Human Rights Research,’ The American Statistician, 67:4, 191-200. 

 

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel en Seksueel Geweld tegen Kinderen (2014), 

Mensenhandel in en uit beeld II: Cijfermatige rapportage 2008-2012. Den Haag: Nationaal 

Rapporteur. (Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual 

Violence against Children, Trafficking in Human Beings: Visible and Invisible II: A 

Quantitative Report 2008-2012). 

 



44 

 

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel en Seksueel Geweld tegen Kinderen (2016), Monitor 

Mensenhandel: Cijfers mogelijke slachtoffers 2011-2015. Den Haag: Nationaal Rapporteur. 

(Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against 

Children, Monitor Trafficking in Human Beings: Figures on possible victims 2011-2015). 

 

OSCE/ODIHR (2004), National Referral Mechanisms; Joining Efforts to Protect the Rights 

of Trafficked Persons /A Practical Handbook, Warsaw. 

 

Silverman, B. (2014), Modern slavery: an application of multiple systems estimation. Gov. 

UK. 

 

Smit, P.R. & J.J.M. Van Dijk (2014), ‘History of the Dutch Crime Victimization 

Survey(s),’ in D. Weisburd & G. Bruinsma (eds), Encyclopedia of Criminology and 

Criminal Justice, 2286-2296. 

 

United Nations (1950), Report on the state of crime, 1937-1946 / prepared by the Secretariat 

1950-02-23. 

 

UNODC (2013), Issue Paper: Abuse of a position of vulnerability and other “means” within 

the definition of trafficking in persons. Vienna: United Nations.  

UNODC (2014). Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2014, UNODC, New York:  United 

Nations publication, Sales No. E.14.V.10  

UNODC (2014), Issue Paper: The role of ‘consent’ in the trafficking in persons protocol. 

Vienna: United Nations. 

 

UNODC (2015), Issue Paper: The concept of ‘exploitation’ in the trafficking in persons 

protocol. Vienna: United Nations. 

 

Van der Heijden, P.G.M., J. Whittaker, M. Cruyff, B. Bakker & R. Van der Vliet (2012), 

‘People born in the Middle East but residing in the Netherlands: invariant population size 

estimates and the role of active and passive covariates,’ The Annals of Applied Statistics, Vol. 

6, No. 3, 831–852. 

 



45 

 

Van der Heijden, P.G.M., M. Cruyff & G.H.C. van Gils (2015), Schattingen illegaal in 

Nederland verblijvende vreemdelingen 2012-2013. WODC. (Estimations of illegal residents 

in the Netherlands 2012-2013). 

 

Van der Heijden, P.G.M., de Vries, I., Böhning, D., Cruyff, M. (2015), ‘Estimating the size of 

hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture methodology, with a discussion of the 

International Labor Organization’s global estimate of forced labour,’ in Kangaspunta, K. (ed.) 

Forum on Crime and Society, Special Issue: Researching Hidden Populations: Approaches to 

and Methodologies for Generating Data on Trafficking in Persons, 8, 109-136. 

 

Van der Heijden, P.G.M., Zwane, E.N. & Hessen, D.J. (2009). ‘Structurally missing data 

problems in multiple list capture-recapture data.’ Advances of Statistical Analysis, 93, (pp. 5-

21) (17p.). 

 

Van Dijk, J.J.M. (2008), The World of Crime: Breaking the Silence on Problems of Security, 

Justice and Development across the World. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

 

Van Dijk, J.J.M., Van der Knaap, L.M., Aebi, M.F., Campistol C. (2014), Counting what 

Counts: Tools for the Validation and Utilization of EU Statistics on Human Trafficking. 

PrismaPrint, Tilburg. 

 

Van Dijk, J.J.M. (2015), ‘The Case for Survey-based Comparative Measures of Crime.’ 

European Journal of Criminology, 12(4), 437-456. 

 

Van Dijk, J.J.M. and P.G.M. van der Heijden (2016), Research Brief. Multiple Systems 

Estimation for estimating the number of victims of human trafficking across the world. 

Vienna: UNODC. 

 

Zhang, S. X. (2012), Trafficking of Migrant Laborers in San Diego County: Looking for a 

Hidden Population. San Diego, CA: San Diego State University.   



46 

 

Appendices 
 

Appendix A1: Population size estimates (x 1,000) based on model with four covariates 

and on model with six registers only 

 

 

Model with 

covariates 

Model 

without 

covariates 

2010 5.5 4.0 

2011 7.9 7.0 

2012 8.7 18.0 

2013 7.2 13.0 

2014 7.0 10.5 

2015 5.9 5.3 

 

 

Appendix A2: Observed and estimated presumed victims, and ratio estimated/observed 

for totals and by form of exploitation (sexual/non-sexual) 18 

 
 Observed 

totals, 6 

lists 

Observed 

totals, 5 lists 

Estimated 

totals, 6 

lists 

Estimated 

totals, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 6 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 

lists 

2010 992 953 5,484 5,562 5.5 5.8 

2011 1,222 1,200 7,905 8,424 6.5 7.0 

2012 1,704 1,277 8,671 8,435 5.1 6.6 

2013 1,428 1,103 7,196 7,078 5.0 6.4 

2014 1,564 1,249 7,013 6,702 4.5 5.4 

2015 1,325 1,152 5,942 5,846 4.5 5.1 
 

 Observed 

sexual, 6 

lists  

Observed 

sexual, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

sexual, 6 lists 

Estimated 

sexual, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 6 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 

lists 

2010 861 824 4,513 4,586 5.2 5.6 

2011 967 946 5,253 5,629 5.4 6.0 

2012 1,437 1,013 6,582              6,260 4.6 6.2 

2013 1,240 923 5,732 5,625 4.6 6.1 

2014 1,255 952 4,901 4,625 3.9 4.9 

2015 972 801 3,971              3,834 4.1 4.8 

 

 

Observed 

non-sexual, 6 

lists 

Observed 

non-sexual, 

5 lists 

Estimated 

non-sexual, 6 

lists 

Estimated 

non-sexual, 

5 lists 

Estimated 
ratio, 6 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 

lists 

2010 131 129 971 975 7.4 7.6 

2011 255 254 2,652 2,795 10.4 11.0 

2012 267 264 2,090 2,175 7.8 8.2 

2013 188 180 1,463 1,453 7.8 8.1 

2014 309 297 2,112 2,077 6.8 7.0 

2015 353 351 1,971 2,012 5.6 5.7 

                                                        
18 In some cases the reported observed frequencies slightly diverge from the observed frequencies in the data. 

(e.g. the reported observations sum to 8,235 instead of 8,234 in the case of 6 lists, and to 6,934 instead of 6,935 

in the case of 5 lists). This is due to rounding error when imputing missing values on the covariates. 



47 

 

Appendix A3 Observed, estimated, and ratio estimated/observed  presumed victims by 

age (minor/adult) 

 
 Observed 

minor, 6 

lists 

Observed 

minor, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

minor, 6 lists 

Estimated 

minor, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 6 

lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 

lists 

2010 153 138 1,564 1,315 10.2 9.5 

2011 198 194               2,035 1,928 10.3 9.9 

2012 222 217               2,371 2,239 10.7 10.3 

2013 262 261               2,093 2,594 8.0      9.9 

2014 295 290 1,926 1,946                 6.5 6.7 

2015 349 343 1,698 2,082                 4.9 6.1 

 
 Observed 

adult, 6 lists 

Observed 

adult, 5 lists 

Estimated 

adult, 6 lists 

Estimated 

adult, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 6 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 

lists 

2010             839   815 3,920 4,246 4.7 5.2 

2011            1,024 1,006 5,869 6,496 5.7 6.5 

2012            1,482 1,060 6,300 6,196 4.3 5.8 

2013            1,166 842 5,103 4,484 4.4 5.3 

2014 1,269 959 5,087 4,756 4.0 5.0 

2015              976       809 4,244 3,764 4.3 4.7 

 

 

Appendix A4 Observed, estimated and ratio estimated/observed  presumed victims by 

nationality (Dutch/non-Dutch) 

 
 Observed 

Dutch 

nationals, 

6 lists 

Observed 

Dutch 

nationals, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

Dutch 

nationals, 6 

lists 

Estimated 

Dutch 

nationals, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 6 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 lists 

2010 321 320 3,075 3,325 9.6 10.4 

2011 341 340 3,743 4,613 11.0 13.6 

2012 434 432 4,731 4,891 10.9 11.3 

2013 458 458 4,384 4,417 9.6 9.6 

2014 482 476 3,815 3,768 7.9 7.9 

2015 446 445 3,392 3,281 7.6 7.4 

 

 Observed 

non-Dutch 

nationals, 

6 lists 

Observed 

non-Dutch 

nationals, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

non-Dutch 

nationals, 6 

lists 

Estimated 

non-Dutch 

nationals, 5 

lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 6 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 lists 

2010 671 633 2,409 2,236 3.6 3.5 

2011 881 860 4,161 3,811 4.7 4.4 

2012 1,270 845 3,940 3,544 3.1 4.2 

2013 970 645 2,811 2,661 2.9 4.1 

2014 1,082 773 3,198 2,934 3.0 3.8 

2015 879 707 2,549 2,564 2.9 3.6 

 

 

  



48 

 

Appendix A5 Observed, estimated and ratio estimated/observed presumed victims by 

sex (female/male) 

 
 Observed 

female, 6 

lists 

Observed 

female, 5 lists 

Estimated 

female, 6 

lists 

Estimated 

female, 5 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 6 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 lists 

2010 879 843 4,862 4,972 5.5 5.9

2011 995 974 6,540 7,114 6.6 7.3

2012 1,505 1,083 7,544 7,303 5.0 6.7

2013 1,262 939 6,403 6,252 5.1 6.7

2014 1,315 1,005 5,961 5,665 4.5 5.6

2015 1,048 876 4,989 4,839 4.8 5.5

 
 Observed 

male, 6 lists 

Observed 

male, 5 lists 

Estimated 

male, 6 lists 

Estimated 

male, 5 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 6 lists 

Estimated 

ratio, 5 lists 

2010 113 110 622 589 5.5 5.4

2011 227 226 1,364 1,311 6.0 5.8

2012 199 194 1,127 1,131 5.7 5.8

2013 166 164 793 826 4.8 5.0

2014 249 244 1,052 1,037 4.2 4.3

2015 277 276 953 1,006 3.4 3.6

 


	UNODC-DNR research brief_cover.pdf2
	UNODC-DNR research brief.pdf_2

