















































Monitoring mechanisms in the fight against human trafficking


Monitoring mechanisms in the fight against human trafficking 
15 October 2010 - Introduction 
 
Excellencies, Ladies and gentlemen, dear guests, dear friends 
 
Any self-respecting society should do everything in its power to ensure that the five P’s, 
prevention, protection, prosecution, punishment and partnership, are a constant and integral 
part of anti-trafficking policies. And not just in policies but also implementation in practice. 
Together these P’s form the cornerstone of the efforts in the fight against human trafficking. 
That was also the message conveyed by the European Court of Human Rights in its 
judgement in the case of Rantsev v. Cyprus and Russia, earlier this year. Trafficking in human 
beings, whether within the sex industry or in other sectors, ís a violation of art 4 of the 
European Convention on Human Rights. With this ruling and the admonitions to the states 
that are party to the European Convention, the European Court set out to become perhaps the 
most important monitor of Trafficking in human beings.  
 
The conference today, as well as the expert meeting yesterday, both mark the tenth 
anniversary of the Dutch National Rapporteur. Marking ten years of independent monitoring 
of the joint efforts in the Netherlands to combat Human Trafficking. 
 
Since 1 April 2000 the Netherlands has had a National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human 
Beings (NRM). I am happy to see that Mrs Anna Korvinus, who was the first Dutch 
Rapporteur, is here with us today. The appointment of the first Rapporteur was the direct 
result of the (EU) Hague Declaration of 1997, which called upon member states to appoint 
national rapporteurs in order to report on trafficking to their respective governments.  
Ten years of monitoring by an independent rapporteur have resulted in a total of exactly 200 
recommendations.  
The recommendations cover a wide range of issues, - all the five P’s - and have been directed 
at various key actors. The recommendations were based on research, on knowledge. 
One of the key elements in a successful counter trafficking strategy ís knowledge. Knowledge 
is power; power as a dynamic concept to approach and tackle the problem efficiently and 
effectively, and to improve the fight against it, in policy making and in the practical 
application of the law. Solid research and analysis therefore form the basis of effective anti-
trafficking measures that governments should take. 
It is widely recognised that knowledge about trafficking in human beings is crucial to tackling 
this issue in an adequate manner. We need to know more about human traffickers and how 
they work, but also about victims: how do they cope when they are being victimised, and in 
the period following this? If they are brave enough to tell their story, to what extent are they 
offered the necessary assistance and support, and which interventions in the fight against 
human trafficking and in relation to victim support are truly effective? At the same time, it is 
clear that is very difficult to collect reliable information, for which there are various reasons. 
Let me name a few  

– exploitation partly occurs in hidden sectors such as the (unlicensed) sex industry, the 
informal economy and behind closed doors in private households, making it difficult 
to detect; 

– victims of sexual ánd  labour exploitation are reluctant to come forward. 
Therefore, and also because exploitation does not, generally speaking, cause any visible 
disturbance, cases remain undiscovered. It is unknown how large this ‘dark number’ is. After 
all, as we all know, trafficking is easily overlooked if you do not want to see it. My report that 

 1



is to be presented this afternoon will show that in general, authorities in the Netherlands have 
wanted to see. 
But again as the European Court made perfectly clear in the Rantsev case, in the end it is the 
results that count. Therefore a significant proportion of the recommendations deal with 
putting into practice what has already been set down in black and white. With capacity and 
priorities. For this purpose, in 2007 I recommended the creation of a task force, involving all 
of the partners in the chain. This recommendation was adopted.  
 
The Hague Declaration of 1997, also encouraged national rapporteurs to cooperate on a 
regular basis. 
It is good to see that national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms have been established in 
other countries, and that they have formed an informal network within the EU.  I believe that 
this network is a big step forward to promoting the exchange of best practices and sharing 
experiences at national and European level. They can thus be an important impetus in the 
realm of collecting internationally comparable data. As I said, information and knowledge are 
the pillars for successful counter trafficking action. Acquiring and exchanging internationally 
comparable data on trafficking is therefore of paramount importance. 
 
Results 
This afternoon I will present the eighth report on ten years work of the Dutch national 
rapporteur. The report reviews the recommendations made on all important topics ánd their 
reception.  
This afternoon I will also further elaborate on the results of the ten years of recommendations. 
At this moment I will confine myself to saying that many have been fully adopted or partly 
acted upon, the importance of some has receded and others have been regularly repeated. But 
as we all know, the work is never done.  
 
Yesterday’s expert meeting 
Yesterday an expert meeting took place to exchange views and information on good practices, 
and to further contribute to strengthening anti-trafficking policies. Topics included monitoring 
and rapporteurship, involving the judiciary, victims, partnership and labour exploitation. 
These topics are relevant in every country.  
 
Today’s conference 
Today’s conference also covers many issues. We have aimed at providing a comprehensive 
approach, including all the necessary ‘P’s’.  
 
I thank the Dutch House of Parliament for co-organizing this conference and for their 
hospitality. And I want to emphasize the importance of Parliament as a checking mechanism 
also where trafficking in human beings is concerned. I trust that my reports over the past ten 
years have been a source of knowledge for them. 
 
I wish you a very fruitful conference. 
Thank you. 
 

 2


