



































txd50049 1..3


OrganDonationandProcurement
Establishing Trafficking in Human Beings
for the Purpose of Organ Removal and
Improving Cross-Border Collaboration
in Criminal Cases: Recommendations
Paul Holmes,1 Conny Rijken, PhD,2 Sergio D'Orsi, MA,3 Luuk Esser, LLM,4 Floor Hol, LLM,4 Anne Gallagher, PhD,5

Galit Greenberg,6 Louis Helberg,7 Lisa Horvatits,8 Sean McCarthy, BS,9 Jonathan Ratel, LLM,10

Nancy Scheper-Hughes, PhD,11 John Forsythe, MD12

Abstract: In this short summary report on the legal definition of trafficking in human beings for the purpose of organ removal
and improving cross-border collaboration in criminal cases, challenges, and recommendations in the areas of defining the
crime, criminal investigation and prosecution, and cross-border cooperation are made. These are the outcomes of a working
group discussion during the writers' conference of the HOTT project, a European Union-funded project against trafficking in hu-
man beings for the purpose of organ removal.
(Transplantation Direct 2016;2: e58; doi: 10.1097/TXD.0000000000000571. Published online 4 January 2016.)
The conclusions and recommendations set out below rep-resent a composite summary of the findings of the mem-
bers of group 3 and reflect their collective views, developed
from detailed professional experience, in-depth considera-
tion of the various project reports, and the outcomes of the
group discussions.

The summary is also posited within the context that
trafficking in human beings (THB) for the purpose of organ
removal (THBOR) should not be viewed as a predominantly
global challenge taking place outside Europe; on the con-
trary, as a number of the case studies and group discus-
sions demonstrate, the crime of THBOR can not only
involve European citizens because both donors and recipients
within the global context of the crime, but that the principal
Received 13 October 2015.

Accepted 22 October 2015.
1 Independent Consultant, Italy.
2 INTERVICT, Tilburg Law School, Tilburg University, The Netherlands.
3 European Police Office, The Netherlands.
4 Bureau of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings, The Netherlands.
5 Independent Consultant, Australia.
6 Department of International Affairs, Office of State Attorney, Israel.
7 Directorate for priority crime investigations, South African Police, South Africa.
8 Eurojust, The Hague.
9 Federal Bureau of Investigation, United States of America.
10 Special Prosecution Office, Republic of Kosovo.
11 University of California, Davis, CA.
12 Transplant Unit, Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh, United Kingdom, United Kingdom.

The author declares no funding or conflicts of interest.

P.H. led the group's discussion and participated in the writing of the article. C.R.
led the group’s discussion and participated in the writing of the paper. S.D.'O.
participated in the group's discussions and/or provided comments to the
draft. L.E discussed the paper with C.R. and provided comments to the draft.

Transplantation DIRECT ■ 2016

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Transplantation Di
elements of the criminal enterprise also occur on the conti-
nent of Europe.

ESTABLISHING THE CRIME

Legislation

Challenges
Treaty ratifications on THBOR are inconsistent, and the

international legal benchmark definitions of THBOR are
not consistently transposed into domestic legislation.

In general terms, there is a degree of confusion among
criminal justice practitioners on the interpretation of THBOR
as defined under Article 3 of the Trafficking Protocol (2000),
Article 2 of EC Directive 2011/36/EU and Article 4 of the
Council of Europe Convention against Trafficking in Persons
F.H. participated in the group's discussions and/or provided comments to the
draft. A.G. participated in the group's discussions and/or provided comments to
the draft. G.G. participated in the group's discussions and/or provided comments
to the draft. L.H. participated in the group's discussions and/or provided
comments to the draft. L.H. participated in the group's discussions and/or provided
comments to the draft. S.M.C. participated in the group's discussions and/or
provided comments to the draft. J.R. participated in the group's discussions
and/or provided comments to the draft. N.S.H. participated in the group's
discussions and/or provided comments to the draft. J.F. participated in the group's
discussions and/or provided comments to the draft.

Correspondence: Paul Holmes, Villa Tre Vulcani, Contrada Lo Spaccio, Brattiro,
Drapia, VV 89862, Italy. (pholmesit@aol.com).

This report is published with the financial support of the Prevention of and Fight
against Crime Programme European Commission—Directorate General Home Affairs.

Copyright © 2016The Authors. Transplantation Direct. Published byWolters Kluwer
Health, Inc. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NC-ND),
where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly cited.
The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially.

ISSN: 2373-8731

DOI: 10.1097/TXD.0000000000000571

www.transplantationdirect.com 1

rect. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.

mailto:pholmesit@aol.com
http://
http://


2 Transplantation DIRECT ■ 2016 www.transplantationdirect.com
(2005). Moreover, confusion between trafficking for the re-
moval of organs and trade in organs further complicates
the understanding of practices. The Council of Europe
Convention on Trafficking in Human Organs adopted in
July 2014 is an example thereof.

More specifically, there is a lack of clarity in respect of
the legal interpretation of the definition of “organ,” the clas-
sification of a “perpetrator” and “victim” and of the applica-
tion of their rights and protections and, in particular,
establishing the requisite “means” underArticle 3,most espe-
cially with regard to the abuse of a position of vulnerability.

A number of other criminal offences that are characteristi-
cally related to THBOR are either not covered by domestic
legislation or are not sufficiently identified and investigated
by practitioners, or both.

Among both criminal justice and medical practitioners,
legal and ethical confusion exists in respect of the interface
between the oath of medical secrecy in relation of doctor-
patient confidentiality and the (existence of a) duty on medi-
cal practitioners to disclose cases of THBOR.

Recommendations

(1) Article 3 of the Trafficking Protocol remains the bench-
mark definition and criminal justice practitioners should
adhere to its primacy, especially in respect of the “preven-
tion, protection, prosecution and partnership” ethos con-
tained within its terms.

(2) Both legislative and nonlegislative responses are required
to improve cross-border collaboration in criminal cases. In
many instances, legislative measures are a precondition
for improving the nonlegislative response.

(3) Further clarification on the circumstances under which
a person is considered a “perpetrator” or “victim” of
THBOR is needed.

(4) Legislators should ensure that a victim-centred, rights-
based approach to THBOR is consistently applied to the
transposition and application of THBOR in domestic leg-
islation in compliance with the international benchmarks
and that victims have full access to compensation and res-
titution remedies.

(5) Legislators should ensure THBOR offences are extra-
ditable, states can claim extraterritorial jurisdiction and
predicate for the purposes of assets confiscation.

(6) Legislators should ensure that the full range of subsidiary
criminal offences related to THBOR (eg, buying and sell-
ing of organs, receiving an organ that has been obtained
through THBOR) are fully available to prosecutors, pro-
vided that the sanctions for such related offences are
commensurate with the gravity of the crime and that they
include access to the same standard of rights and protec-
tions to the victims as conveyed by the full offence of
THBOR.

(7) Based on the empirical evidence of the crucial importance
of “whistleblowers” to the disclosure of THBOR, legisla-
tors should ensure that full legal protection is available
to those persons that act in such a role.

(8) The relevant legal-medical actors (national, European, and
international transplant organizations,medical ethical com-
mittees, World Health Organization) should clearly estab-
lish a binding rule that the ultimate responsibility for
ensuring full legal and ethical compliance of transplant
procedures remains with the transplanting surgeon and
cannot be delegated.

(9) Given the prevailing goodwill and preparedness that exists
on both sides, the appropriate global-regional structures
Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Transplantation D
within the criminal justice and medical professions should
establish a joint technical working group to draft a co-
operation agreement between both sides that precisely sets
out the nature and extent of the duty of doctor-patient
confidentiality and the conditions under which medical
professionals would be obliged to disclose information
indicating THBOR and the extent and nature of the infor-
mation that should be disclosed by them to the appropri-
ate criminal justice authorities.

Investigation and Prosecution

Challenges
It is recognized that THBOR is an extremely complex

crime to combat but this factor is currently compounded by
either a general lack of awareness of the crime among crimi-
nal justice practitioners, or a reluctance to acknowledge the
existence of the crime or a lack of political will to combat
it—and often a combination of all 3.

There is a reluctance to prosecute senior medical pro-
fessionals and other complicit officials for a crime that is
not well understood at any of the investigator-prosecutor-
judiciary levels.

The particular modus operandi of THBOR results in con-
siderable confusion among practitioners in terms of the inter-
pretation of the requisite means used to commit the crime
and role of consent.

The current response of law enforcement agencies to
THBOR is almost entirely reactive, with little sign of a proac-
tive, multiagency,multidisciplinary approach to achieve early
disclosure of the crime.

Where these complex investigations do take place, they
tend to lack proper multiagency coordination and are under-
resourced. Investigators and prosecutors lack comprehen-
sive, specialized, and case-based guidance on how to build
and prosecute these cases, and there is no specialist training
provided to assist them in the task.

Recommendations

(1) Proactive approach: law enforcement agencies should take
the lead in developing a coordinated, multiagency pro-
active approach to detecting THBOR, and this should
include the development and application of THBOR-
specific indicators as an integral part of programmatic
proactive monitoring of relevant sectors.

(2) Existing multiagency THB networks should be strength-
ened and develop an increased focus onTHBOR.Relevant
actors, especially criminal justice and medical networks,
should appoint specific THBOR focal points within their
structures to facilitate and build more effective informa-
tion sharing partnerships.

(3) In common with current requirements for customs decla-
rations and such like, legislators and immigration/border
police agencies should create a legal requirement for all
persons entering or departing the territory of the State or
the European Union to declare the fact if they are travel-
ling for transplant purposes. Thismeasure intends to work
on 2 levels: it provides the authorities with increased
capacity to monitor such movement and can act as a dis-
incentive for travelling recipients and make the modus
operandi more problematical for the traffickers.

(4) Investigation and prosecution: legislators and other rele-
vant authorities should provide clear guidance to inves-
tigators and prosecutors on the interpretation of the
irect. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.



© 2016 Wolters Kluwer Holmes et al 3
means of “a position of vulnerability” and the role of
“consent” in THBOR cases, in line with the recent guid-
ance papers issued by United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime on these topics, together with clear policy guid-
ance on the approach to be taken by prosecutors in respect
of any implied criminal liability in respect of the role
played by donors and recipients in THBOR cases.

(5) To effectively investigate THBOR, criminal justice profes-
sionals require specialist knowledge of the procedures and
medical protocols attached to legal transplantation, as
proving deviations from those practices is a critical ele-
ment of successful prosecution. To this end, appropriate
criminal justice and medical professionals should collabo-
rate to produce a detailed, step-by-step breakdown of the
entire legal transplant process, encompassing initial assess-
ment practice, transplant procedures, the medical actors,
and the documentation trail for the whole process.

(6) Based on the above, investigators and prosecutors should
develop detailed and case-based guidance for THBORcases
that should include parallel financial investigation guid-
ance and checklist-style templates for use in the interviews
of donors, recipients, and suspects and which focus espe-
cially on the use of means of deception and vulnerability
and the issue of consent.

(7) Building on existing specialized THB training programs,
capacity should be strengthened by the addition of
THBOR-specific, tailored trainingmodules for law enforce-
ment and prosecutorial agencies, together with awareness-
raising initiatives for members of the judiciary.

IMPROVED CROSS-BORDER COOPERATION

Challenges

The challenges associated with cross-border cooperation
in THBOR cases replicate those that already characterize
cross-border cooperation generally, and the general lack of
awareness, complexity, and multidimensional nature of
THBOR cases complicates the overall picture.

In legislative terms, the challenges are exacerbated by in-
consistent treaty approaches, differences in interpretation
of THB law generally and THBOR in particular, and sig-
Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Transplantation Di
nificance variations in procedural rules appertaining to
the admissibility of evidence and duty of disclosure in crimi-
nal cases.

In practical terms, variations in national priorities, a tendency
by practitioners to focus only on the domestic dimension of
THBOR, combined with a general lack of coordination and
an inexplicable reluctance to use existing support structures
for cross-border cooperation all serve to impede significant
improvements in cross-border cooperation.

Recommendations

(1) Investigators and prosecutors should make greater use
of existing transnational cooperation structures, such as
European Police Office, International Police Office and
Eurojust, and the expertise located within national central
authorities.

(2) These organizations should either establish or strengthen
existing focal point capacity to ensure a proper level of fo-
cus on and response to THBOR cases.

(3) More use should be made of joint investigation team tech-
niques to address transnational THBOR cases.

(4) Greater use should be made of video testimony provisions
for taking the testimony of donors, recipients ,and other
witnesses.

(5) Transnational law enforcement structures, such as Euro-
pean Police Office and International Police Office, should
cultivate higher levels of cross-border information sharing
between practitioners and use their existing criminal anal-
ysis capacity to develop a more accurate assessment of the
scale, location, and modus operandi of THBOR and to
identify high-risk locations.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This article was produced by the authors during awriters' con-
ference held at Europol Headquarters, November 20, 2014,
under the auspices of the HOTT project. The article received
comments from the following project partners: Martin
Gunnarson, Susanne Lundin, Ingela Byström, Jessica de
Jong, Willem Weimar, and Frederike Ambagtsheer.
rect. Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc.


