









































UNITED NATIONS OFFICE ON DRUGS AND CRIME

FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY

Volume 8, 2015

Guest Editor 

KRISTIINA KANGASPUNTA

Special issue 
Researching hidden populations: approaches to and methodologies  

for generating data on trafficking in persons

UNITED NATIONS
New York, 2015

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   1 25/06/2015   11:16:51



Views expressed in signed articles published in Forum on Crime and Society are those of 
the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Secretariat of the United Nations. 

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this publication do not 
imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Secretariat of the United 
Nations concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authori-
ties, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers and boundaries.

© United Nations, June 2015. All rights reserved, worldwide.

Requests for permission to reproduce this work are welcomed and should be sent to the 
Secretary of the Publications Board, United Nations Headquarters, New York, N.Y. 10017, 
U.S.A. or also see the website of the Board: https://unp.un.org/Rights.aspx. Governments 
and their institutions may reproduce this work without prior authorization but are 
requested to mention the source and inform the United Nations of such reproduction.

Publishing production: English, Publishing and Library Section, United Nations Office 
at Vienna.

UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATION
Sales No. E.14.IV.5

ISBN 978-92-1-130328-5
eISBN 978-92-1-057111-1

ISSN 1020-9212

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   2 25/06/2015   11:16:51



iii

PREFACE

Forum on Crime and Society is a United Nations sales publication issued by the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), based in Vienna.  
It is published in the six official languages of the United Nations: Arabic, 
 Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish. 

Forum presents policy-oriented articles on crime prevention and criminal jus-
tice. It focuses on trends and practices in the field of criminal justice that are 
of special significance to the international community. 

The present issue of Forum is devoted to research approaches to and  
methodologies for generating data on trafficking in persons. It is the ninth 
issue of Forum to be published and widely distributed to a varied readership. 
Past issues of Forum are available on the UNODC website (www.unodc.org/
unodc/en/data-and-analysis/Forum-on-Crime-and-Society.html). 

All contributions to this issue of Forum have been written by the authors in 
their personal capacity and should not be regarded as official views or posi-
tions of the institutions they represent. 

UNODC wishes to thank Sonja Busch for her assistance in preparing the 
present issue of Forum.

Since 2010, when the General Assembly, in its resolution 64/293, adopted the 
United Nations Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons, 
UNODC has been assigned to collect relevant data and report on trafficking 
in persons, in particular on the patterns and flows of such trafficking, at the 
national, regional and global levels. Even though the importance of including 
statistics in an approach to tackling human trafficking is widely acknowledged 
in international legal and public documents, it is also recognized that there is 
still a scarcity of knowledge on the total scale of such trafficking. In preparing 
the global report on trafficking in persons, UNODC is faced with several 
challenges such as definitional ambiguity and the absence of primary data 
collection based on sound sampling and documentation procedures in the 
participating States.

Despite the internationally accepted legal definition of trafficking in persons 
established in the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in 
Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   3 25/06/2015   11:16:51



iv

Convention against Transnational Organized Crime,a* in practice there are 
various interpretations of what constitutes such trafficking. The use of differ-
ent interpretations, such as who are the victims of such trafficking, where can 
they be found and what are trafficking violations, makes it difficult to com-
pare data at the international level. The different quality and documentation 
of procedures contribute to the difficulty of estimating the global scope of the 
problem, the biggest challenge being the hidden nature of such trafficking.

The long-term vision of UNODC is to know more about the hidden side of 
the phenomenon of trafficking in persons and to facilitate the development of 
more innovative research approaches in order to receive more sound data 
from States. For this reason, an expert workshop on research in trafficking in 
persons was organized in Vienna from 11 to 13 December 2013. Participants 
were researchers with experience conducting quantitative or qualitative stud-
ies in different areas, reaching hidden populations. The objectives of the 
meeting were to discuss the quantitative and qualitative aspects of new 
research methodologies and to develop concrete ideas and recommendations 
to be used by UNODC to improve its research on patterns and flows of 
human trafficking at the national, regional and global levels.

This issue of Forum is aimed at presenting the variety of research approaches 
and findings to a broader public and contributing to a discourse on how to 
obtain through research more sound data on the different aspects of traffick-
ing in persons. 

Concrete recommendations by the participating authors include:

• Using existing international and national surveys for analysis

• Taking advantage of existing data collection vehicles, especially in 
industrialized countries 

•  Encouraging the collection and analysis of data in microlevel settings 
and not relying on current estimates

• Carefully defining indicators of human trafficking with common 

a “‘Trafficking in persons’ shall mean the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or 
receipt of persons, by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of 
fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving 
of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the 
purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution 
of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar 
to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs” (General Assembly resolution 55/25, annex II, 
article 3).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   4 25/06/2015   11:16:51



v

characteristics to allow for the development of common counter-
measures reflecting all international legal frameworks 

• Establishing a global test databank to host various examples of traf-
ficking instruments, together with their supporting documents and 
validation studies

The articles presented in this volume of Forum deal with challenges and solu-
tions in collecting research data on trafficking in persons and presenting 
quantitative and qualitative aspects in reaching hidden populations and how 
to use them for research on such trafficking.

Editorial policy and guidelines for publication 

The Editorial Board invites scholars and experts from around the world to 
contribute articles to Forum on criminological and socio-legal issues. Articles 
submitted for publication must be original, that is, they should not have been 
published elsewhere. The length of manuscripts to be considered for publica-
tion as articles should not exceed 6,000 words. Manuscripts should be sub-
mitted in electronic format and preferably also in hard copy and should be 
accompanied by the curriculum vitae of the author and an abstract. 

All manuscripts, reviews and correspondence should be addressed to the 
Managing Editor of Forum, either by mail (Policy Analysis and Research 
Branch, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, P.O. Box 500, 
1400 Vienna, Austria) or by e-mail (forum@unodc.org).

Kristiina Kangaspunta
Chief of the Global Report on Trafficking in Persons Unit
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   5 25/06/2015   11:16:51



15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   6 25/06/2015   11:16:51



vii

CONTENTS

Page

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . iii

Estimating human trafficking worldwide: a multi-mode strategy 
 Jan van Dijk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1

Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with  
the hodgepodge of numbers? 
 Ieke de Vries and Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at  
standardized measurement 
 Sheldon X. Zhang and Li Cai . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37

Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 
 Thomas M. Steinfatt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63

Proposed utilization of the network scale-up method to estimate the  
prevalence of trafficked persons 
 Janie F. Shelton . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85

Developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using  
geo-mapping techniques 
  Kelle Barrick, Wayne J. Pitts, Joseph P. McMichael, William D. Wheaton  

and Brian M. Evans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95

Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture 
 methodology, with a discussion of the International Labour Organization’s 
global estimate of forced labour 
  Peter G.M. van der Heijden, Ieke de Vries, Dankmar Böhning and  

Maarten Cruyff  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 109

Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 
 Fabrizio Sarrica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   7 25/06/2015   11:16:51



15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   8 25/06/2015   11:16:51



1

ESTIMATING HUMAN TRAFFICKING WORLWIDE:  
A MULTI-MODE STRATEGY

By Jan van Dijk*

Abstract

In this article, the author presents the results of an in-depth analysis of the 
production of statistics by Eurostat on formally identified victims of traffick-
ing in human beings in Europe. He concludes that the concept of an identi-
fied victim of trafficking in human beings has different meanings in different 
European Union member States and that the identification process is organ-
ized differently as well. On the basis of those regional results, he argues that 
statistics on the number of recorded victims of human trafficking cannot be 
used as a reliable measurement of the extent of trafficking in human beings in 
a country, neither in the European Union nor elsewhere. As follow-up to this 
critical assessment, the author argues in favour of a worldwide programme for the 
collection of survey-based estimates of human trafficking and, to that end, pre-
sents a methodological strategy combining various modes of data collection.

Keynotes: identification of victims of trafficking in human beings, Eurostat,  
cross-country differences, dark number studies, multi-mode strategies.

Introductory remarks

International legal instruments on human trafficking such as the Protocol to 
Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and 
Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transna-
tional Organized Crime [1], are explicitly victim-focused. Their ultimate aim 
is to reduce the number of persons, especially women and children, victim-
ized by this type of crime. In addition, these instruments seek to improve the 
provision of services to identified victims. Considering these aims, the special 
interest in collecting international statistics on victims of human trafficking is 
obvious. Such statistics are important for monitoring the impact of the Traf-
ficking in Persons Protocol, which, when properly implemented, should result 
in lower numbers of victims of human trafficking and a higher proportion of 
such victims being adequately served. 

* Tilburg University, the Netherlands.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   1 25/06/2015   11:16:52



2 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

The collection of international statistics on crime is challenging due to vary-
ing legal definitions, reporting patterns and recording practices. For this rea-
son, official figures on police-recorded crime are increasingly seen as input 
statistics of criminal justice systems that cannot, and should not, be used to 
measure the level of crime or trends in crime ([2], [3]). In spite of this, statis-
tics on the number of recorded victims of human trafficking continue to be 
collected by, among others, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
(UNODC) and Eurostat. 

The present article contains the results of an in-depth analysis of the produc-
tion of such statistics in Europe. Building on those results and a paper by 
Seo-Young Cho [4], the author argues that statistics on the number of 
recorded victims of human trafficking should be seen as an imperfect meas-
urement of the performance of policies to counter such trafficking, or failure 
to implement such policies, rather than as a measurement of the phenomenon 
of human trafficking. In line with this assessment, the author argues in favour 
of introducing a worldwide programme to collect estimates of human traffick-
ing that could supersede the tentative estimates of the International Labour 
Organization (ILO) [5] and, to that end, presents a methodological strategy 
for the collection of such data.

Counting identified victims 

Official crime statistics from police forces or courts are case- or offender-
directed and do not normally provide information on the number of victims 
of crime recorded by the authorities. In the case of human trafficking, this 
problem has to some extent been overcome by the introduction in many 
countries of mechanisms for the identification of victims of human traffick-
ing. The author is not aware of mechanisms for the identification of any other 
type of crime. The increasing number of mechanisms for the identification of 
victims of human trafficking prompted UNODC to collect statistics on the 
number of officially identified victims for its global reports on trafficking in 
persons. It should be noted, however, that the Trafficking in Persons Protocol 
itself is silent on the identification of victims. After the adoption of the Proto-
col in 2000, the concept of identifying victims in the framework of a national 
referral mechanism was elaborated in a handbook of the Office for Demo-
cratic Institutions and Human Rights of the Organization for Security and 
Co-operation in Europe [6]. The concept has subsequently found its way into 
several regional legal instruments, prime examples of which are the Council 
of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, 
opened for signature at Warsaw on 16 May 2005, and directive 2011/36/EU 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   2 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Estimating human trafficking worldwide: a multi-mode strategy 3

of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union on pre-
venting and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims. 
Both of these European instruments oblige States parties or member States 
to establish appropriate mechanisms for the early identification of victims. 
The 2011 directive also instructs States to provide assistance and protection 
as soon as there are reasonable grounds to presume that someone is a victim 
of human trafficking (a so-called presumed victim). The latter obligation 
implies that in all European Union member States “appropriate mechanisms” 
must be in place for identifying victims of human trafficking, as well as mech-
anisms for identifying presumed victims.*

The existence of legal obligations to identify victims of human trafficking 
makes the European region a test case for the collection of comparable statis-
tics on identified victims. In this region the legal and institutional conditions 
for the collection of such statistics seem relatively favourable. In 2010, Euro-
stat for the first time requested member States to use a questionnaire to report 
on, inter alia, numbers of identified and presumed victims. To what extent has 
this regional statistical exercise been successful? In a study commissioned by 
the European Commission, a team of scholars that included the author of this 
article made an in-depth assessment of the victim statistics collected by 
 Eurostat [7]. It appears that the number of victims per 100,000 population 
shows extreme variation, ranging from lows of 0.1 in Hungary, Lithuania and 
 Portugal to highs of 5.7 in Bulgaria, 6.0 in the Netherlands and 6.3 in Cyprus. 
Can these national figures be seen as a proxy of the extent of the phenome-
non? Is human trafficking indeed most prevalent in Bulgaria, Cyprus and the 
Netherlands?

The first observation of the research team was that the guidance given by 
Eurostat to national respondent on the meaning of the concept of an identi-
fied or presumed victim was far from clear-cut. Even in the European context 
the concept has remained largely undefined. Fifteen European Union mem-
ber States have reported on identified victims only. Ten member States have 
reported on both identified and presumed victims and two member States 
have reported on presumed victims only. In the Eurostat report, identified 
and assumed victims have been added up to yield the total for each country 
and for the European Union. That has led to further variation in the meaning 
of the victim statistics. 

* The 2011 directive does not specify what identification mechanisms should be established, nor 
does the Council of Europe Convention. At this juncture, national referral mechanisms do not exist 
in all member States and existing national referral mechanisms show considerable variation. For a 
critical review, see Prevent, Combat, Protect: Human Trafficking—Joint UN Commentary on the EU 
Directive—A Human Rights-Based Approach (2011).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   3 25/06/2015   11:16:52



4 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

The fact that identification mechanisms are in place provides no assurance 
that the recorded numbers of victims are comparable. Just as statistics on 
police-recorded crimes are strongly dependent on the surveillance and inves-
tigative efforts of police forces, the numbers of persons identified as victims 
are strongly influenced by the efforts of police forces, border control agencies, 
labour inspectorates and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to detect 
or reach out to victims. The reports of the monitoring body of the Convention 
on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, the Group of Experts on 
Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (GRETA), reveal great variation 
in the funds and human resources available for victim assistance or action to 
counter such trafficking. To complicate matters further, the formal identifica-
tion of victims, unlike statistics of police-recorded crimes, has been put into 
the hands of very different institutions. The reports note that, although the 
police are the principal source of information on identified or presumed vic-
tims in the European Union, this is not the general rule. Nine European 
Union member States obtained such information from NGOs and 10 obtained 
such information from a variety of other sources. The other sources showed 
wide variation: state-run social services in Denmark and Sweden, reception 
centres in Finland, victim services in Poland, prosecutors, social services and 
international organizations in Romania, a special agency acting as a clearing 
house for presumed victims in the Netherlands and Portugal, and local 
authorities, regional councils and social services in the United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland. 

The results of the study reveal a stunning variation in what the concepts of 
identified and presumed victims actually mean within the institutional con-
text of a country. Some examples may suffice to convey the scope of variation. 
In Sweden, statistics can be retrieved from NGOs but the official statistics on 
victims are derived from irrevocable court convictions for human trafficking. 
Since many suspected cases of trafficking are never solved by the police and 
brought before a court, the Swedish statistics can be seen as the most mini-
malist victim statistics imaginable. In most other countries, stand-alone 
mechanisms for victim identification are in operation. 

One of the most elaborate mechanisms is run in the United Kingdom. British 
statistics given to Eurostat refer to victims definitely identified through the 
national referral mechanism, either by the specialized unit within the police 
or by the border agency. Victims who have been provisionally identified by 
these agencies on a reasonable grounds basis but whose victim status is not 
confirmed later in the process are left out, although most of them have 
received assistance for months. If they had been included as presumed vic-
tims, the total number for the United Kingdom would have been almost twice 
as high. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   4 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Estimating human trafficking worldwide: a multi-mode strategy 5

In Belgium, the concept of an identified victim refers to third-country nation-
als who were granted a recovery period or residence permit by the immigra-
tion authorities upon the decision of the prosecutor and who have been 
received by any of the three dedicated reception centres in the country. These 
formally identified victims make up just a small part of all victims of traffick-
ing because nationals of Belgium and other European Union member States 
are not included. For this reason, Belgium is one of the five countries where 
relatively few victims have been identified and where many more victims have 
received assistance according to the statistics provided.

Austria and Germany report on victims identified by the police, excluding 
victims who have received assistance from NGOs without formal identifica-
tion by the police.*

In Ireland, a national referral mechanism is in operation, but since it is not 
functioning, the numbers of recorded victims refer to all victims who have 
been in contact with the specialized unit within the police. 

The examples mentioned above yield statistics that exclude certain categories 
of victims and should be seen as deflated statistics. An example of possibly 
inflated statistics, or overcounting, is found in the Netherlands. The Nether-
lands has reported on the number of victims recorded by an NGO ( CoMensha) 
operating (on behalf of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human 
Beings and Sexual Violence against Children) as an observatory or clearing 
house for all relevant state institutions and NGOs encountering persons 
showing any signs of being possible victims of human trafficking. These vic-
tims are counted as presumed victims. This recording mechanism covers 
many more victims than those formally identified by the police or immigra-
tion authorities in the framework of the national identification mechanism for 
victims who are irregularly residing in the country (governed by immigration 
regulation B8/3Vc). 

According to the evaluation report of GRETA, France has not yet established 
a formal identification mechanism for victims of human trafficking. The num-
ber of victims reported on by France seem to be taken from police adminis-
trations and to include victims of pimping or victims of smuggling of migrants. 

The statistics previously provided by Spain to Eurostat are likewise based on 
police administrations and those statistics also seem to be lacking in specific-
ity. They undercount by missing many victims of human trafficking and over-
count by including victims of other types of offences.

* In Germany, representatives of the NGO community resist exchanges of data on victims with 
state agencies to ensure the highest possible degree of confidentiality [8].

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   5 25/06/2015   11:16:52



6 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

The examples above show that the numbers of victims identified are not only 
dependent on the efforts of the key institutions involved in identification but 
that on top of this, the concept of an identified or presumed victim is inter-
preted by the European Union member States in such diverging ways as to 
seriously compromise the comparability of the resulting statistics on persons 
so defined. The scope and outreach of the national mechanisms of identifica-
tion vary widely, ranging from identification through a final conviction of the 
trafficker by a criminal court in Sweden to the identification of any person 
showing signs of being a possible victim according to police officers, NGOs 
or labour inspectors in the Netherlands. The ranking of individual countries 
in terms of numbers of identified or presumed victims does not, therefore, 
reflect the relative size of or trends in the phenomenon of human trafficking. 
The author fully agrees with the caveat included in the Eurostat report that 
“more reported cases do not necessarily mean an increase in the actual num-
ber of victims” ([9], p. 30).*

If the statistics on identified victims collected by Eurostat cannot be reliably 
used as a comparative measurement of human trafficking, what does this 
imply for the statistics on victims collected by UNODC? Given the absence 
of any formal obligation of States parties to the Trafficking in Persons Proto-
col to establish and maintain identification mechanisms—and the absence of 
a definition of the concept of identification in the UNODC questionnaire, it 
can safely be concluded that the concept of identified victims will be even 
more heterogeneous among the Member States of the United Nations than 
among the member States of the European Union. On the basis of the Euro-
pean test case, the author concludes that statistics of identified victims of 
human trafficking cannot and should not be used as a comparative measure-
ment of the phenomenon of human trafficking. 

Counting identified victims for what?

A critical assessment of the validity of statistics on victims begs the question 
“For what purposes are such statistics collected?” Using econometric  analysis, 
one of the experts participating in the above-mentioned study tested whether 

* In her presentation at the expert meeting of the project on tools for the validation and utilization 
of European Union statistics on human trafficking (TRAFSTAT), held in Amsterdam in September 
2013, the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children 
in the Netherlands, Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen, made the point that victim identification is 
strongly driven by awareness among relevant officials. She presented data showing that the surge in 
presumed or identified victims in the Netherlands between 2008 and 2012 was mainly driven by 
greater awareness among the border police, resulting in many more reports to CoMensha of suspected 
cases of trafficking [10].

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   6 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Estimating human trafficking worldwide: a multi-mode strategy 7

the number of identified or presumed victims can be used as a proxy indica-
tor for the policy efforts of countries to address human trafficking [4]. Her 
results confirmed that the higher the quantifiable input to address human 
trafficking, such as available police officers, the higher the number of identi-
fied or presumed victims. She suggested including such statistics in indices 
of policies to counter human trafficking, such as those developed by Van Dijk 
and Klerx-Van Mierlo [11], rather than in indices of the extent of human 
trafficking. This finding can be illustrated by the comparatively high number 
of victims in the Netherlands. According to the GRETA report on the 
 Netherlands, the country complies better with international standards and 
invests more in detection and prosecution, education and victim protection 
than almost all other countries evaluated so far. In conclusion, the high num-
ber of identified victims of human trafficking in the Netherlands reflects the 
quality of the policies to counter such trafficking rather than the extent of 
the phenomenon. 

Just as statistics on the number of identified victims are often erroneously 
used as an indication of the extent of the phenomenon in a country, statistics 
showing the gender, age, nationality or type of exploitation of the victims are 
all too frequently used as an indication of the nature of human trafficking in 
a country rather than as an indication of the priorities within the national 
policies to counter such trafficking. Extreme values for factors such as the age 
of victims may reveal special patterns in a country but they should primarily 
be used to raise questions about the focus of national policies. For example, 
there is a relatively low proportion of registered minors in Austria, Cyprus, 
the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, 
Slovakia and Slovenia; is trafficking in minors very rare in those countries or 
is it simply overlooked by the authorities? In the author’s opinion, such devi-
ant values primarily beg the question of whether the identification of victims 
who are minors is receiving sufficient attention. Another example is the rela-
tively low proportion of male victims in Germany and Hungary; the low value 
may suggest that national policies focus more on sexual exploitation and less 
on labour exploitation. In Finland, the relatively low number of identified 
victims of sexual exploitation may be an indication that policies are focused 
solely on labour exploitation. The proportion of nationals among identified 
victims shows similar divergence: in the destination countries Germany and 
the Netherlands, the proportion of identified or presumed victims who were 
nationals of Germany and the Netherlands were 20 and 30 per cent, respec-
tively; this finding is in line with the general conclusion in a 2012 UNODC 
report that one in every four victims between 2007 and 2010 was a national 
of the country where he or she was exploited ([13], p. 50). However, most 
other destination countries in the European Union show a much lower pro-
portion. The latter finding begs the question of whether those countries’ 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   7 25/06/2015   11:16:52



8 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

identification and detection systems are sufficiently geared towards victims of 
trafficking in those countries. 

Deviant values in these and other statistics on victims deserve further scrutiny 
because they may be the result of existing policies or be peculiarities or defi-
ciencies of the national policies regarding certain forms of human trafficking. 
Only after such examination can such values be interpreted as reflecting spe-
cial patterns in human trafficking in a country.

Beyond counting identified victims

For lack of research-based knowledge on the true volume of victims of human 
trafficking in the world, the latest ILO estimate of 20.9 million victims of 
forced labour per year is the best available estimate, and the most widely 
quoted one [5]. Estimates have also been made by ILO for regions, including 
Europe. Using the European Union estimate, FairWork, an NGO in the 
Netherlands, has calculated an estimate of the real number of trafficking vic-
tims in the Netherlands. The ILO estimates are produced in two stages. The 
first stage consists of a sophisticated extrapolation of the number of recorded 
victims of labour exploitation in public reports using the capture-recapture 
formula. The second stage consists of extrapolating those estimates of 
recorded victims to estimate the real number of victims on the basis of sur-
veys on exploitative experiences of returned migrants in four countries in the 
Caucasus. In the final analysis, the global, regional and national estimates are 
based on the multiplication of the estimated numbers of recorded victims by 
a factor derived from survey research on labour exploitation conducted in a 
handful of small countries in one subregion. It should therefore be best 
regarded as a sophisticated “guesstimate” rather than as a reliable measure. 

The true number of victims is certainly many times higher than the number 
of identified victims, but there is as yet no basis for determining how much 
higher. The sole method for estimating the true volume of various forms of 
human trafficking in the world would entail conducting large-scale surveys 
among risk groups about their personal experiences during the past one or 
two years in a sample of member States. Standardized surveys on victims of 
types of common crime have been carried out worldwide [2]. A pilot study for 
a survey on experiences with trafficking or exploitation could be modelled 
after these earlier dark number studies regarding other types of complex 
criminality and after the pioneering ILO surveys on labour exploitation men-
tioned above. Pilot studies on the extent of criminal exploitation among 
migrant workers have also been carried out in the United States of America 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   8 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Estimating human trafficking worldwide: a multi-mode strategy 9

with funding from the Department of Justice [12]. In the Netherlands, the 
Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs has commissioned a similar pilot study 
among migrant workers. Innovative studies have also been conducted with 
the aim of estimating the prevalence of exploitative practices in the sex indus-
try in countries such as Cambodia, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom 
[14].

Estimating the number of victims of human trafficking worldwide:  
a proposal

Conducting dark number studies to determine the true number of trafficking 
victims in the world would require funds and human resources that are 
unlikely to be made available in the near future. As an alternative, the author 
has devised a research strategy that would allow the international community 
to arrive at tentative but credible estimates without requiring unrealistically 
large financial resources. This strategy seeks to combine results from various 
sources in a selection of countries representative of the main regions of the 
world (Africa, Asia, Europe, North America, South America and Oceania). 
Three test countries would be selected from each of the regions, preferably 
countries with large populations. 

As the first step of this strategy, a research team would need to collect from 
existing sources in each of the 18 test countries estimates of the stock of work-
ers in illegal non-sex labour markets and of the stock of sex workers. In most 
countries such estimates can be retrieved from existing publications. In some 
countries this may require the commissioning of ad hoc studies.

As a second step, surveys on criminal exploitation, modelled after the ILO 
surveys in the Caucasus and the study conducted by Zhang [12] in the United 
States, would be carried out in each of the 18 countries. Separate studies 
would need to be conducted on the exploitation of vulnerable groups such as 
illegal migrant workers who are not sex workers and on the exploitation of sex 
workers. Although some of these studies may need to be commissioned by the 
research team, it is to be expected that, over the years, the results of such 
studies in an increasing number of countries would become available. The 
availability of such results could be a criterion in the selection of the test 
countries.

The second step of the strategy would yield estimates of the proportion of sex 
workers and other illegal workers who are exploited in each of the test coun-
tries. As a third step in the strategy, the exploitation proportions would be 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   9 25/06/2015   11:16:52



10 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

applied to the stocks of illegal workers and sex workers estimated in the first 
step. This would yield estimates of the total number of persons exploited in 
non-sex labour markets and the sex industry in each test country. Using exist-
ing knowledge on the average duration of exploitation per person (e.g. four 
months in the sex industry and perhaps six month in the other sectors), esti-
mates can subsequently be made of the total number of persons exploited 
during a period of one year.

In the fourth step of the strategy, the estimated number of exploited persons 
per year per country in each of the two categories would be compared with 
the number of identified victims according to the UNODC Global Report on 
Trafficking in Persons. In this way, the ratio of the estimated real number of 
victims to the number of officially identified victims in each country could be 
calculated. By averaging these ratios, and possibly weighting the national 
ratios according to population size, the ratio could be calculated for each of 
the regions and for the world total. Each regional ratio could also be tentatively 
used to estimate the real number of victims in other individual countries in the 
region, extrapolating from the known number of identified victims.

A numerical example

To illustrate the proposed multi-mode model, an example of how the strategy 
would work out if one of the test countries were the Netherlands is provided 
below. According to available research findings, there are 30,000 illegal 
migrants working in the country and 20,000 sex workers. According to a 
study in Amsterdam, 20 per cent of the sex workers can be categorized as 
being victims of criminal exploitation (human trafficking) [14]. There is less 
known about the proportion of illegal migrants exploited by their employers. 
Using the results of the study conducted by Zhang in the United States [12], 
the proportion of exploited persons is tentatively put at 30 per cent. On the 
basis of this, it can be assumed that there are 4,000 victims of trafficking for 
the purpose of sexual exploitation and 9,000 (30 per cent of 30,000) victims 
of trafficking for labour exploitation. 

Assuming that victims of sexual exploitation are on average exploited for  
four months, this results in an estimate of 12,000 victims of trafficking for 
sexual exploitation per year. Assuming that the average duration of exploita-
tion is six months, this results in an estimate of 18,000 victims per year.

According to the number of identified victims of sexual exploitation in the 
Netherlands in recent years (about 1,000 per year), the ratio between the 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   10 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Estimating human trafficking worldwide: a multi-mode strategy 11

estimated real number and the official number in the country is 12:1. Look-
ing at the low number of formally identified victims of labour exploitation 
(about 300 per year), this gives a ratio of roughly 30:1. Since the number of 
officially identified victims of sexual exploitation in Europe is 15,000, the real 
number can be estimated at 180,000 when the ratio of the Netherlands (30:1) 
is applied. The number of identified victims of labour exploitation is much 
lower—about 1,500. Applying the ratio of the Netherlands would result in an 
estimate of the true number of victims: 45,000. In the proposed strategy, the 
ratio to be applied is not the ratio in a single country but the average ratio of 
three selected countries in the region. 

Discussion

The core of international statistics on trafficking in human beings consists of 
the numbers of identified and/or presumed victims. Of all statistics on traf-
ficking in human beings, these are cited the most often. They are in most 
cases presented as measurements or proxy measurements of the size of the 
phenomenon. Commentators on these numbers often observe that they must 
be seen as reflecting just the tip of the iceberg. On the basis of the statistics on 
identified victims, the public is informed that human trafficking is a very 
prevalent humanitarian problem that is still on the increase and therefore 
needs to be tackled by the Government as soon as possible. The use of soft 
data to estimate the number of identified victims for propagandistic purposes 
has been criticized on methodological grounds [15-18]. Analysis of the Euro-
stat statistics on victims [9] confirms that such statistics cannot and should 
not be used as a measurement of the phenomenon [7]. The proper use of such 
statistics would entail using them as a proxy indicator of the performance of 
government agencies in their fight against human trafficking, with a higher 
number of identified victims indicating better performance. Having said that, 
it should be acknowledged that the use of victim statistics for the purposes of 
awareness-raising and lobbying is fully legitimate. For this reason, more 
knowledge about the true number of victims of human trafficking is urgently 
needed, both for monitoring purposes and for responsible awareness-raising.

Pilot studies of the exposure to exploitative practices of risk populations such 
as illegal migrant workers or sex workers have yielded encouraging results. In 
theory, it seems feasible to embark on an initiative to conduct standardized 
dark number studies of victims of human trafficking, similar to the Interna-
tional Crime Victims Survey coordinated by the United Nations Crime and 
Justice Research Institute between 1996 and 2005. In the current situation, it 
may prove difficult to ensure sufficient funding for such global research. As an 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   11 25/06/2015   11:16:52



12 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

alternative, the author has proposed a strategy that uses a combination of 
official statistics of identified victims and the results of dark number studies 
in selected countries as the bases for regional estimates of the true number of 
victims of trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation and labour 
exploitation.

References

 1. United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574. 

 2. Jan van Dijk, John van Kesteren and Paul Smit, Criminal Victimisation in Inter-
national Perspective: Key Findings from the 2004-2005 ICVS and EU ICS (The Hague, 
Boom Juridische uitgevers, 2007). 

 3. Jan van Dijk and Andromachi Tseloni, “Global overview: international trends in 
victimization and recorded crime”, in The International Crime Drop: New Directions in 
Research, Jan van Dijk, Andromachi Tseloni and Graham Farrell, eds. (Houndmills, 
Basingstoke, Hampshire, Palgrave Macmillan, 2012). 

 4. Seo-Young Cho, “Towards a comprehensive index on anti-trafficking policy: an 
assessment of the 3P Index, GRETA-based Scorecard and EuroStat”, in Counting 
What Counts: Tools for the Validation and Utilization of EU Statistics on Human Trafficking 
(International Victimology Institute, University of Tilburg, 2014), pp. 154-197. 

 5. International Labour Organization, “ILO global estimate of forced labour: 
results and methodology” (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2012). 

 6. Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, Office for Democratic 
Institutions and Human Rights, National Referral Mechanism: Joining Efforts to Protect 
the Rights of Trafficked Persons — A Practical Handbook (Warsaw, 2004). 

 7. Jan van Dijk and others, Counting What Counts: Tools for the Validation and Utiliza-
tion of EU Statistics on Human Trafficking (Tilburg, Netherlands, INTERVICT, Uni-
versity of Tilburg/Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 2014). 

 8. “Data protection and right to privacy for marginalised groups: a new challenge 
in anti-trafficking policies”, papers presented at the international datACT conference 
organized by KOK e.V. and La Strada International, Berlin, 24-25 September 2013. 

 9. Eurostat, Trafficking in Human Beings, Methodologies and Working Papers 
(Luxembourg, Publications Office of the European Union, 2013). 

 10. C. Dettmeijer-Vermeulen, “To count or not to count: the utilization of statis-
tics”, presentation made at the expert meeting of the project on tools for the 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   12 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Estimating human trafficking worldwide: a multi-mode strategy 13

validation and utilization of European Union statistics on human trafficking (TRAF-
STAT), Amsterdam, September 2013. 

 11. Jan Van Dijk and Fanny Klerx-Van Mierlo, “Quantitative indices for anti-human 
trafficking policies: based on reports for the U.S. State Department and the Council 
of Europe”, Crime, Law and Social Change, vol. 61, No. 2 (6 February 2014), 
pp. 229-250. 

 12. Sheldon X. Zhang, Looking for a Hidden Population: Trafficking of Migrant Labour-
ers in San Diego County (San Diego, California, San Diego State University, 2012). 

 13. Global Report on Trafficking in Persons (United Nations publication, Sales No. 
E.13.IV.1). 

 14. Anton van Wijk and others, Vulnerable Profession: A Study into the Amsterdam 
Prostitution Branch — Summary, Frans van Rossum, transl. (Amsterdam, Bureau 
Beke, 2013). 

 15. United States, Government Accountability Office, Human Trafficking: Better 
Data, Strategy and Reporting Needed to Enhance U.S. Anti-trafficking Efforts Abroad, 
GAO report GAO-06-825 (Washington, D.C., July 2006). 

 16. Ann Jordan, “Fact of fiction: what do we really know about human trafficking?”, 
Issue Paper 3 (Washington, D.C., American University Washington College of Law, 
Program on Human Trafficking and Forced Labor, Center for Human Rights and 
Humanitarian Law, May 2011). 

 17. Dita Vogel, “Tip of the iceberg? Improving the interpretation and presentation 
of trafficking data”, Policy Brief (International Centre for Migration Policy Develop-
ment, March 2014). 

 18. Alexis A. Aronowitz, “Future possibilities for the utilization of EU statistics on 
human trafficking” in Counting What Counts: Tools for the Validation and Utilization of 
EU Statistics on Human Trafficking (Tilburg, Netherlands, International Victimology 
Institute, University of Tilburg, 2014), pp. 115-153. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   13 25/06/2015   11:16:52



15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   14 25/06/2015   11:16:52



15

EXTREMELY WANTED: HUMAN TRAFFICKING STATISTICS 
— WHAT TO DO WITH THE HODGEPODGE OF NUMBERS?*

By Ieke de Vries** and Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen***

Abstract 

The total scale of human trafficking is still unknown. The existing estimates 
are frequently based on false or unfounded assumptions, insufficient and 
unreliable data and inadequate use of methodologies. Yet statistics on the 
scale of the problem are often used in political debates on, for instance, what 
policy on prostitution would be the most effective for combating sexual 
exploitation. Consequently, improper comparisons are made of the total scale 
of human trafficking in various countries. The authors of this article suggest a 
new perspective on the use of statistics on human trafficking in smaller set-
tings. On the basis of research by the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in 
Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children in the Netherlands, the 
authors discuss three ways in which statistics are of the utmost importance in 
the fight against human trafficking: in informing policy (evidence-based pol-
icy), in exposing bottlenecks on the basis of which suggestions can be made 
to introduce more efficient policies and as a starting point for further research 
providing answers to questions such as why certain aspects still seem to be 
underexposed in the fight against human trafficking.

Keywords: National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual  
Violence against Children, human trafficking statistics, evidence-based policy, 
Netherlands. 

Introduction 

In March 2014, 12 Years a Slave won the Academy Award for Best Film. 
The film is set in the United States of America of the nineteenth century, 
during a period when many people were sold as slaves, physically 

* This article is an updated version of four reports of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in 
Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children in the Netherlands [1-4]. 

** Academic researcher working for the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and 
Sexual Violence against Children in the Netherlands.

*** National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children in 
the Netherlands.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   15 25/06/2015   11:16:52



16 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

exploited, tortured and abused. It is widely acknowledged that slavery-
like practices are not just part of the past: about 21 million people world-
wide live in slavery today, according to the director of the film, Steve 
McQueen. His figure is based on the estimate of 20.9 million victims* 
made by the International Labour Organization (ILO) ([5], [6]). More 
recently, the Walk Free Foundation estimated that there are nearly 
29.8 million victims** worldwide [7]. Such estimates are often reproduced 
without examining how researchers arrived at their estimates ([8], 
pp.  1344-1345; [9], pp. 86-90). The above-mentioned estimates have 
been given significant media attention. In news releases, it is often sug-
gested that although exact figures are not available, it is likely that the 
number of victims of human trafficking is higher rather than lower than 
the estimated number of such victims (see, for example, Sharifi [10]). In 
numerous academic works, the estimates of the total scale of human traf-
ficking are often considered to be on the conservative side (see, for 
example, Shoaps ([11], p. 934)). In a study on the total number of “vic-
tims of slavery and human trafficking” in 37 countries in Europe, Datta 
and Bales mention that “the size of the dark figure for slavery/trafficking 
crime for most European countries is so large that it suggests a crisis of 
public policy and law enforcement” ([12], p. 829). In reality, the total 
number of trafficked persons, as well as offenders (who are generally 
disregarded in estimates), is unknown. 

In this article, the authors first explore briefly the complexity of calculat-
ing the total scale of trafficking in human beings. In various academic 
works published in recent years, efforts have been made to estimate the 
total scale of trafficking in human beings at the national and international 
levels (see, for example, International Labour Organization [5], Interna-
tional Labour Office [6], Walk Free Foundation [7], Bottenberg and oth-
ers [13] and FairWork [14]). At the present time, however, there is no 

* With the exception of human trafficking for the purpose of organ removal, forced marriage and 
forced adoption, this estimate encompasses the types of exploitation specified in article 3 of the 
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, 
supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime ([1], p. 18; 
[5], p. 20). ILO applied a capture-recapture methodology to estimate the number of registered 
victims. On the basis of four national surveys, ILO thereafter calculated which portion of the total 
population of victims of human trafficking was registered, which was 3.6 per cent. This percentage 
was used to calculate the unregistered portion of the population, leading to the ILO estimate of 
20.9 million victims (standard error: 1.4 million (6.7 per cent)). The range of this estimate is between 
19.5 million and 22.3 million victims. The reliability interval is 68 per cent, which means there is still 
a 32 per cent chance that the estimate does not fall within that range [5]. The National Rapporteur 
critically assessed, inter alia, the ILO estimate with the purpose of providing suggestions for further 
improvements ([1], pp. 17-31).

** The range of this estimate is between 28.3 million and 31.3 million victims [7].

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   16 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 17

systematic methodology for estimating the scale of human trafficking in its 
entirety (see also Sarrica ([15], p. 4)). The lack of accuracy in estimating 
the total scale poses problems in creating effective and coherent policies to 
counter human trafficking ([1], pp. 17-32; [2], p. 21; [5]; [8]; [16-24]). 
Nonetheless, available figures on the total scale of human trafficking are 
often used in support of, for instance, a particular policy on prostitution. 
The authors show how debates on the most efficient prostitution policy 
for tackling human trafficking underpin the request for statistics on the 
total scale of human trafficking. In those debates, improper comparisons 
are often made of the total scale of human trafficking in various countries. 
As long as reliable estimates on the total scale of trafficking in human 
beings are absent, the authors advocate microlevel quantitative research 
that allows for the necessary interpretation in concrete settings (see also 
Weitzer ([23], pp. 15-16)), as quantitative data have proved to be valuable 
in efforts to tackle human trafficking. The authors also examine the use-
fulness of statistics on human trafficking: in informing policy, in exposing 
bottlenecks in efforts to counter human trafficking and as a guide for fur-
ther research. The authors conclude that, in the absence of reliable esti-
mates, the available statistics on the nature of human trafficking at the 
national and local levels are more relevant for guiding measures to counter 
human trafficking. 

Scale statistics

For the purpose of this article, figures on the total scale of human trafficking 
are referred to as scale statistics. A basic formula to retrieve scale statistics on 
human trafficking is as follows: 

“The scale of human trafficking is equal to the scale of registered—
known—human trafficking minus the false positives (human trafficking 
that is registered as such but is not in reality human trafficking) plus the 
dark figure (of unregistered/unknown human trafficking), which includes 
the false negatives (human trafficking that is known but is not recognized 
or registered as such)” ([1], p. 18). 

A formula for the total scale of trafficking in human beings is shown in the 
figure below.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   17 25/06/2015   11:16:52



18 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Note:  The figure does not indicate actual scale ratios. 
Dark figure: human trafficking that is unknown  
False negatives: human trafficking that is known to the relevant authorities but is not registered  
False positives: victims or perpetrators who have been registered but in the end may not be 
victims or perpetrators of the delinquency for what they have been registered  
Registered human trafficking: visible human trafficking that is registered by authorities

Simply said, to calculate the total scale of human trafficking, accurate data on 
both the visible part and the invisible part of human trafficking are required. 
Nonetheless, the application of the formula is apparently challenging. The 
difficulty in reaching reliable scale statistics is mainly caused by the challenges 
researchers face in attempts to measure this phenomenon. There are two 
main challenges in the application of the formula. First, when researching 
human trafficking, it is necessary to deal with hard-to-reach populations, for 
which the scale and boundaries are unknown and for whom a reliable sam-
pling frame does not exist ([22], p. 2; [25], p. 18). This factor is not unique to 
data on human trafficking—it appears in data on many other forms of organ-
ized crime, resulting in the crime being underreported ([19], [26-28]). Like 
most other offenders, traffickers aim to keep their criminal activities hidden 
from investigative agencies. Yet not every crime is equally hidden. In cases 
involving trafficking in human beings, the victims are not readily inclined to 

Formula for the total scale of trafficking in human beings

Total scale of human trafficking

False negative

Dark figure

False positives

Registered human trafficking

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   18 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 19

report their perpetrators and therefore tend to be less well documented (i.e. 
they have a larger dark figure), whereas in cases involving other forms of 
crime, the victims may be more willing to inform the police. Trafficked per-
sons may be afraid to report their situation to the police, they may deny their 
victimhood or they may not consider themselves as victims ([1], pp. 17-18; 
[12], p. 823; [25]). 

Second, what part of human trafficking is visible (known and registered) 
depends to a great extent on independent factors that have no direct link 
with the actual scale of human trafficking. For instance, despite the interna-
tionally accepted legal definition of trafficking in persons established in the 
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially 
Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime [29], in practice there are different 
interpretations of what constitutes such trafficking ([1], p. 93; [2], pp. 241-
244; [22], p. 7; [23], p. 7; [30], pp. 180-184; [31]). By way of illustration, in 
some countries moral attitudes may imply that prostitution is, by definition, 
regarded as human trafficking. Consequently, the data that are collected 
might be based on a wider interpretation of human trafficking than the one 
adopted in countries such as the Netherlands, where prostitution is not crimi-
nalized ([1], pp. 93-94). In general, the availability, nature and scope of data 
on human trafficking depend on the underlying legal instruments that crimi-
nalize (and define) such trafficking. As such, an absence of specific legislation 
causes that no standardized information will be available ([32], pp. 32-33; 
[33]). Other factors, such as the priorities set by authorities in tackling human 
trafficking, the capacity that is made available, public attention for human 
trafficking, changes in legislation, the research methods and research facili-
ties used to report on the crime and financial resources affect both the avail-
ability of quantitative data and what kind of data can be collected in a country 
([1], pp. 12, 39 and 61; [2], pp. 241-244; [32], p. 37); see, in the context of 
other types of crime, Aebi and others [34], Aebi [35], Bennett and Lynch 
[36],  Farrington, Langan and Tonry [37], Howard and Smith [38] and Soares 
[39]).

The issue of false positives deserves special attention. Very few researchers 
refer to false positives when determining the visible part of human trafficking 
(for an example of researchers who do mention false positives, see Zhang and 
others ([24], p. 81)). Nonetheless, the mapping of false positives is extremely 
challenging because of different and continuously changing interpretations 
of the concepts of “victims” and “perpetrators”. Thus, the framing of human 
trafficking in a specific period provides the basis of what is known about such 
trafficking. Hence, changing attitudes about and interpretations of the con-
cept of human trafficking most likely result in “living statistics”, referring to 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   19 25/06/2015   11:16:52



20 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

statistics that change over time and retrospectively (see, in the context of 
statistics on murder, Bovenkerk and Hogewind ([26], p. 3)). As a matter of 
fact, what person A considers to be cases of human trafficking may be to 
person B cases of, for instance, domestic violence and considered as false 
positives. This dilemma may be even more apparent when it comes to count-
ing victims of human trafficking, since “victimhood” is a highly sensitive and 
politicized concept. Indeed, the label “victim of trafficking” is occasionally 
used for other matters, such as defending moral ideologies and political 
agendas that are not necessarily related to fighting human trafficking 
[40-46].

The total scale of human trafficking can only be estimated. Given the chal-
lenges that are inherent to human trafficking (including the challenges that 
have been mentioned above), standard methods of estimation cannot be used. 
It is difficult to estimate the total number of trafficked persons. The existing 
estimates are frequently based on false or unfounded assumptions or are inac-
curate because of insufficient and unreliable data and inadequate use of 
methodologies ([1], pp. 17-32; [2], p. 21; [8]; [16]; [18-24]). By extension, 
instruments that attempt to rank countries on the prevalence of human traf-
ficking (see, for example, Walk Free Foundation [7]) give a distorted picture 
of the actual extent and nature of human trafficking. As for the Global Slavery 
Index, which ranks 162 countries on the prevalence of “slavery” (defined 
most broadly as human trafficking, forced labour and slavery), most of the 
criticism refers to the use of a “medley of unstandardized and thus noncom-
parable sources” ([23], p. 14).

The request for scale statistics from debates  
on prostitution policy

The request for scale statistics across countries is reinforced by current politi-
cal debates about what would be the most efficient policy for countering 
human trafficking. One frequently asked question in these debates is whether 
the legalization of prostitution generates more human trafficking. Often in 
these debates, improper comparisons are made of the total scale of human 
trafficking in various countries [3]. Several scholars tackling this difficult 
question found evidence that certain prostitution policies have an impact on 
the prevalence of human trafficking [47-50].

In the light of the above, Cho, Dreher and Neumayer [47] concluded in their 
research on the extent to which legalized prostitution increases human traf-
ficking that there is more cross-border human trafficking to countries where 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   20 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 21

prostitution has been legalized. This is also what Jakobsson and Kotsadam 
concluded in their article [49]. In order to reach their conclusion, the authors 
of both articles conducted cross-sectional research.* However, cross-sectional 
research provides no indication of the impact of changes in legislation on 
prostitution in a particular period. Therefore, the authors carried out case 
studies based on the situations in Denmark, Germany and Sweden [47] and 
in Norway and Sweden [49]. In those countries, legislation on prostitution 
was amended during the period covered by their studies [3].

While the authors of both articles employed a refined method to reach their 
conclusions, some compelling reservations remain ([3]; [23], p. 13). The 
authors depend on insufficient and partly unreliable data on both the visible 
part (by way of cross-sectional research) and the invisible part (by way of case 
studies and estimates). Three major issues stand out. First and foremost, for 
the cross-sectional research the authors relied on data concerning human 
trafficking situations that were known.** However, what part of human traf-
ficking is visible (known and registered) depends to a great extent on inde-
pendent factors that have no direct link with the actual scale of human 
trafficking. Second, for the dark figure, the authors of the above-mentioned 
articles relied on existing estimates, among others, the ILO estimates pub-
lished in 2005 [51].*** As emphasized in the previous section, figures on the 
total scale of human trafficking are still in their infancy, particularly when the 
aim is to inform policy. Third, the total scale of human trafficking in the sense 
of sexual exploitation is not solely dependent on policies regarding prostitu-
tion since there are many more push-and-pull factors that may have an impact 
on the prevalence of human trafficking. These factors can differ greatly from 
one country to another [3].

* Cross-sectional research is a snapshot of certain issues since this kind of research looks at a single 
moment in time. The opposite is longitudinal research, where the study is conducted over a certain 
period in order to document the process. Longitudinal research requires a baseline measurement, for 
example: “How much human trafficking was there before the policy change?” Such baseline 
measurements, however, are not always feasible for policy changes that were introduced several years 
earlier [3].

** Cho, Dreher and Neumayer [47] used the 2006 report Trafficking in Persons: Global Patterns of the 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) [52] to reach the conclusion that a correlation 
exists between prostitution legislation in a particular country and the reported stream of human 
trafficking to that country. In addition to the UNODC report, Jakobsson and Kotsadam used data 
from a 2006 ILO working paper by Danailova-Trainor and Belser [53]. 

*** In 2005, ILO estimated that, in the period 1995-2004, there were a minimum of 12.3 million 
victims of “forced labour” (standard error: 2.5 million victims); the range of this estimate is between 
9.8 million and 14.8 million victims [51].

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   21 25/06/2015   11:16:52



22 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Evidence-based policy by means of quantitative data

In the absence of reliable figures on the total scale of human trafficking, cross-
country comparisons on the prevalence of human trafficking still rely on 
unreliable and inaccurate data. Essentially, what is left is a “hodgepodge of 
numbers that hardly lend themselves to evidence-based policymaking” ([8], 
p. 1354). Research on the total scale of human trafficking seems to be bounded 
to, among other things, particular geographical sites, forms of human traffick-
ing and trafficked persons or traffickers (e.g. estimates on prostitutes who are 
indebted in Cambodia ([54], [55])). An expansion of the applied research 
methods “raises problems of feasibility” ([15], p. 5), perhaps because of the 
diversity of trafficking contexts ([56], p. 38). Hence, following Weitzer’s 
thoughts, this article advocates more microlevel research in order to formu-
late “contextually appropriate policy and enforcement responses” ([23], p. 6). 

The importance of including statistics in an approach to tackling human 
trafficking seems to be widely acknowledged in international legal and pub-
lic documents, including the 1997 Hague Ministerial Declaration on Euro-
pean Guidelines for Effective Measures to Prevent and Combat Trafficking 
in Women for the Purpose of Sexual Exploitation and the United Nations 
Global Plan of Action to Combat Trafficking in Persons (see also European 
Commission ([57], [58])). General Assembly resolution 64/293) (see also 
European Commission ([57], [58])). In particular, in article 19 of directive 
2011/36/EU of the European Parliament and the Council of the European 
Union on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and pro-
tecting its victims, it is stated that member States “shall take the necessary 
measures to establish national rapporteurs or equivalent mechanisms. The 
tasks of such mechanisms shall include the carrying out of assessments of 
trends in trafficking in human beings, the measuring of results of anti- 
trafficking actions, including the gathering of statistics in close cooperation 
with relevant civil society organizations active in this field, and reporting” 
[59]. In the Netherlands, the task of reporting on the nature and extent of 
trafficking is mandated to the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human 
Beings and Sexual Violence against Children. The National Rapporteur 
works independently but in close cooperation with relevant stakeholders 
such as the Public Prosecution Service, the National Police and civil society, 
which are responsible for a large part of the data on which analyses have 
been carried out. 

Using as a basis research of the National Rapporteur, the authors suggest a 
new perspective on how statistics lay the foundation for guiding measures to 
counter trafficking. The perspective consists of three parts: statistics to inform 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   22 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 23

policy, to expose bottlenecks and to be used as a starting point for further 
research. As such, it looks primarily at how figures should be interpreted. In 
the following examples, hardly any statistics will be mentioned since naming 
them often does not do justice to the complete quantitative studies. A thor-
ough understanding of statistical analyses requires more qualitative interpre-
tation. This interpretation, in addition to a more detailed description of the 
methodology and further results, can be found in the reports of the National 
Rapporteur ([1], [2], [4]). 

Statistics to inform policy

First and foremost, statistics in general provide a foundation for guiding the 
measures that can be taken to fight crime (see, for example, Hashimoto ([60], 
pp. 33 and 69)). Against this background, an analysis of a sample of 77 human 
trafficking investigations that were sent to the Public Prosecution Service in 
2012, involving 165 suspects and 249 trafficked persons, helps determine 
what policies to fight human trafficking might be most effective ([2],  
pp. 133-134). For instance, increased insight into human trafficking situa-
tions, the trafficked persons and offenders helps to guide the programmatic 
approach to countering human trafficking in the Netherlands. The program-
matic approach has been developed by the Public Prosecution Service and 
rests on two pillars: gaining insight into human trafficking; and developing 
innovative methods, both preventive and repressive, to fight such trafficking. 
In this approach, various units of the Public Prosecution Service and investi-
gative agencies are cooperating. The so-called “barrier model” is an instru-
ment used in the programmatic approach to highlight preventive and 
repressive measures that can be taken to tackle human trafficking. It deter-
mines the obstacles that perpetrators have to overcome in the human traffick-
ing process. Five initial “barriers” have been determined on the basis of 
intelligence that is gathered: entry, identity, accommodation, labour and 
finance ([9], pp. 255-256 and 260-264).

Recruitment lies at the start of the human trafficking process. In order to 
prevent human trafficking, the barriers that should be raised need to focus, 
inter alia, on this stage of the human trafficking process. The quantitative 
analysis of 77 investigations provides knowledge of three specific aspects of 
the recruitment process that must form part of the barrier model. In the first 
place, preventive measures can be imposed at locations where trafficked per-
sons were recruited. Generally speaking, two human trafficking situations in 
the Netherlands can be distinguished: those in which most of the trafficked 
persons have been recruited in the Netherlands (N=40) and those in which 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   23 25/06/2015   11:16:52



24 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

most have been recruited abroad (N=37).* A characteristic of human traffick-
ing situations in which recruitment generally takes place abroad is that both 
the trafficked persons and the suspects are from countries in Central and 
Eastern Europe. Such a finding highlights the need for operational coopera-
tion with those countries in order to find ways to prevent trafficking in human 
beings into the Netherlands. When the recruitment took place in the Nether-
lands, the trafficked persons were usually from the Netherlands and the sus-
pects were from Morocco, Suriname or Turkey, although some foreign men 
and women had also been recruited in the Netherlands. The recruitment pro-
cess in the Netherlands mostly occurred in bars and clubs, via the Internet, at 
school or in prostitution areas (in cases involving sexual exploitation). This is 
where barriers should be raised in order to prevent human trafficking. Fur-
thermore, the findings invalidate the idea that traditional recruitment meth-
ods have entirely been replaced by new means of making contact such as via 
the Internet ([61], p. 23). Nonetheless, the use of the Internet in daily life has 
seen a significant increase and, as a result, traffickers of human beings may 
benefit from social networking sites such as Facebook and Twitter, which 
seem to be used to facilitate such trafficking, for example in recruiting poten-
tial victims ([62], pp. 130 and 132; [63]; [64]). At the same time, the Internet 
offers new opportunities for intervening ([63]; [65], p. 287; [66]). A large-
scale investigation in the United States showed that more than 150 school-
girls between 13 and 16 years old had been recruited via the Internet by 
members of youth gangs. Through the social media, gang members came into 
contact with girls whose status updates showed that they, for example, had 
arguments at home or felt lonely. The girls were welcomed into the gangs and 
received attention that they might not have received at home. In order to 
really be part of the group, the girls had to prostitute themselves: after school 
and before their parents would come home. The gang members encouraged 
the girls to achieve good results at school. The sophisticated modus operandi 
of the gang members ensured that hardly anyone had suspicions of human 
trafficking (for further details, see National Rapporteur’s report covering the 
period 2008-2012 ([2], pp. 155-156), National Rapporteur’s report ([9], 
pp. 195-196) and Ingram [67]). 

Second, preventive measures have the challenging task of breaking through 
the modus operandi of recruiters. In order to do so, quantitative—and 

* This is the outcome of a two-step cluster analysis in which the following factors have been 
included: number of trafficked persons and suspects, the sector in which the trafficked persons have 
been exploited, the suspects’ criminal activities besides human trafficking and whether or not suspects 
operated within a criminal network of more than two members (the latter was supposedly not decisive 
in forming the two human trafficking situations). Some additional analyses have been conducted in 
order to obtain a more detailed view of the recruitment processes; for a more detailed description of 
the results and an explanation of the methodology, see the report of the National Rapporteur covering 
the period 2008-2012 ([2], pp. 153-156 and 186-188).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   24 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 25

qualitative—data are required on aspects that are part of this modus oper-
andi. By way of illustration, an analysis of 77 investigations has shown that in 
most cases (67.5 per cent) at least one of the trafficked persons was acquainted 
with the recruiter: as friends or partners, or as acquaintances in prostitution 
areas (in cases involving sexual exploitation), via social networking sites or 
cafes or bars ([2], p. 156, for further information on this issue, see Shelley 
([68], p. 96), Staring ([69], p. 67) and Verhoeven and van Gestel [70]). It is 
likely that friends, family members or acquaintances are able to gain more 
trust than strangers from potential victims. As pointed out by several authors, 
trust is an important factor in the modus operandi of traffickers in the recruit-
ment phase ([62], p. 55; [68], p. 95; [71], p. 45). By extension, it might be 
extremely challenging though not less important to break through such trust 
patterns. 

Third, preventive measures should focus not only on potential victims but 
also on recruiters. For instance, one finding of the analysis of 77 investiga-
tions is that the roles suspects play seem to be statistically related with certain 
characteristics of suspects. As such, recruiters have a criminal background 
more often than other suspects. To what extent was this criminal background 
known to the police and to what degree was it related to human trafficking 
practices? And were opportunities missed that might have prevented this fur-
ther career in crime? In general, information on the type of roles that suspects 
play in human trafficking processes provide insight into which suspects can 
be signalled by whom and in what places. Suspects often (70.3 per cent 
(N=165)) play a variety of roles in the human trafficking process, such as 
pimps, border-crossing transporters, guards, drivers within the country and 
suspects providing trafficked persons with the necessary documents ([2], 
pp. 167-175). 

Statistics to expose bottlenecks 

Human trafficking statistics have the potential to expose bottlenecks in the 
efforts to combat human trafficking. On this basis, suggestions can be made 
to initiate more efficient policy (see National Rapporteur’s report covering 
the period 2008-2012 ([2], pp. 247-257)). For instance, statistics may con-
tribute to the development of more “rational criminal justice policy and pro-
vide a means of assuring equal enforcement of the laws” ([60], p. 33). Building 
on statistical and legal case law analysis, the National Rapporteur revealed 
several bottlenecks in sentencing and ruling human trafficking cases in the 
Netherlands. A qualitative and partially quantitative analysis of all judge-
ments rendered in the period from October 2009 to August 2012 was con-
ducted, in order to answer questions such as “How is the provision of the 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   25 25/06/2015   11:16:52



26 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

criminal code pertaining to human trafficking applied?”, “What problems 
have emerged in relation to its application?”, “How is human trafficking pun-
ished?”, “What reasons are given for the sentences imposed?” and “How are 
claims by aggrieved parties dealt with in the criminal process?”. The bottom 
line is that in the Netherlands, the provision of the criminal code pertaining 
to human trafficking is a complex provision to apply in practice. In spite of 
this, judges were generally inexperienced in human trafficking cases, a fact 
that becomes visible in some rudimentary figures. For example, more than 
three quarters of the judges concerned in 2010 had dealt with only a single 
human trafficking investigation in that year ([4], pp. 15, 170-172 and 193-
194). The statistical and legal case law study has led the National Consulta-
tive Body for Presidents of Criminal Courts to adopt a number of measures 
relating to the specialization and training of judges hearing human trafficking 
cases ([2], p. 192; [4]; [9]).

The quantitative analysis relates to judgements in human trafficking cases in 
the first instance in 2010 (N=138). This has demonstrated, among other things, 
that the number of acquittals in human trafficking cases has been consistently 
high. Out of 138 indictments, the charges led to convictions for human traf-
ficking in 60.2 per cent of the cases. The percentage of acquittals has been 
higher in cases involving exploitation outside the sex industry (51.7 per cent 
(N=29)) than in cases involving sexual exploitation (35.5 per cent (N=111)).* 
Factors that explain the higher percentage of acquittals in cases involving 
exploitation outside the sex industry may relate to the relatively recent crimi-
nalization of the offence in the Netherlands,** the need to flesh out the defini-
tion of the offence in case law or a knowledge gap in general if it comes to this 
form of exploitation. In addition, the statistical and case law analysis has 
shown major disparities with regard to sentencing in more or less similar 
human trafficking cases, and that does not reflect “a clear framework of 
assessment”. The findings of the National Rapporteur’s statistical and case 
law analysis have resulted in a recommendation to develop orientation points 
for the courts in the interest of sentencing ([4], pp. 37, 117-122, 168-169, 
176 and 178).*** In this regard, it is relevant to look at the situation in other 
countries. In the United States, for instance, the Guidelines Manual, 
containing federal guidelines that should contribute to appropriate and more 

* Two cases were related to both sexual and other forms of exploitation. These cases are only 
included once in the totals ([4], p. 168).

** Exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry was criminalized with effect from 1 January 
2005. All forms of sexual exploitation have been a criminal offence since 1 October 2002 ([4], 
pp. 19-32).

*** For particular offences other than human trafficking, orientation points for the judiciary already 
exist [72]. In addition, the Public Prosecution Service has developed Instructions on Human 
Trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation, which took effect on 1 September 2010, and in the 
sense of servitude and labour exploitation, which entered into force on 1 May 2012 ([4], pp. 97 and 99).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   26 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 27

consistent sentencing in federal crime cases, has been developed by the Sen-
tencing Commission, which itself consists largely of judges [73]. The terms 
“human trafficking offense” and “forced labor” are briefly referred to in the 
federal guidelines, which discuss more extensively the “sexual exploitation of 
a minor” [73-75]. In addition, some elements of the concept of human traf-
ficking, such as the abuse of a position of vulnerability, are included in the 
Guidelines Manual ([31], p. 42; [73]). There is evidence that guidelines that 
have been informed by data, together with legislative directives concerning 
relevant factors for sentencing, might result in a “much more coherent overall 
sentencing policy” ([60], p. 37). Likewise the Guidelines Manual provides 
guidance for uniform and appropriate sentencing decisions in human traf-
ficking cases. 

Statistics as a starting point for looking further

As a final point, statistics regularly lead to questions for which the answers  
need to be taken into account in the design of policy and implementation 
(see, for example, National Rapporteur’s report covering the period 2008-
2012 ([2], pp. 247-257)). One particular question to which statistics can lead 
concerns the aspects of human trafficking that are still underexposed and 
other aspects that may be overrepresented. “Without data, we cannot deter-
mine the causes of overrepresentation, so we cannot develop effective solu-
tions” ([60], p. 32). This can be further elucidated by two examples. To begin 
with, statistics that indicate the number of seen and registered trafficked per-
sons, suspects or human trafficking situations in the Netherlands demon-
strate that exploitation outside the sex industry seems to be underexposed. By 
way of illustration, according to the registrations of the Coordination Centre 
for Human Trafficking (CoMensha),* of 1,711 registered presumed trafficked 
persons in 2012, 71.1 per cent had supposedly been sexually exploited,  
15.0 per cent had supposedly been exploited outside the sex industry (mostly 
in the agricultural and horticultural sectors), 9.5 per cent had not yet worked 
(generally the youngest) and for 4.4 per cent the area of exploitation was 
unknown or not registered. The number of presumed trafficked persons reg-
istered at CoMensha depends on which organizations report them and 
whether they are required to do so. The police and the Royal Netherlands 
Marechaussee are obliged to report trafficked persons and accordingly 
account for most notifications ([2], pp. 25-26 and 248-249). Note that the 
registrations of CoMensha include presumed trafficked persons who are reg-
istered at even the slightest indication of human trafficking. Subsequently, it 
is most likely that those registrations include false positives though it is not 

* Presumed trafficked persons are registered at CoMensha for the purposes of the National 
Rapporteur’s reporting ([1], p. 35; [2], p. 25).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   27 25/06/2015   11:16:52



28 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

known to what extent. The number of sexually exploited presumed trafficked 
persons versus those who are exploited outside the sex industry most proba-
bly reflects the efforts to tackle human trafficking. In this regard, it is conceiv-
able that a dominant focus on sexual exploitation in addressing human 
trafficking results in less attention being paid to exploitation outside the sex 
industry. In this regard, O’Brien writes that “data on trafficking can become 
skewed due to both politicized data collection, and a primary focus on traf-
ficking for sexual exploitation instead of all forms of forced labor. While the 
limitations of sampling typically suffer from an underreporting of the crime 
of trafficking, the skewing of data can result in the overreporting of certain 
types of trafficking, often resulting in the mischaracterization of the nature of 
trafficking” ([21], pp. 12 and 16-17; see also National Rapporteur’s report 
covering the period 2008-2012 ([2], pp. 43, 56 and 136), Goodey [19], 
Weitzer [23], Álvarez and Alessi [76] and Chuang [77]). The opposite, an 
overreporting of exploitation outside the sex industry, is equally possible. This 
might be reflected by some international statistics. By way of illustration, in 
Belgium, labour exploitation has been registered more than sexual exploita-
tion ([78], pp. 44-46). 

The following is another example of the importance of statistics in indicating 
what aspects of human trafficking are underexposed. In the Netherlands, the 
police deal with a substantial number of complaints in which there seem to be 
insufficient investigative leads. Consequently, such cases are almost immedi-
ately dismissed, obviously not leading to the arrest of an offender. According 
to the National Rapporteur, there were about 200 such complaints in 2012. 
It is worth noting that they seemed mostly to involve presumed trafficked 
persons from African countries. The registrations of CoMensha show for the 
year 2012 that the largest group of registered presumed trafficked persons 
were citizens of the Netherlands, closely followed by citizens of countries in 
Central and Eastern Europe. Another significant group (accounting for 
16.9 per cent) were citizens of African countries,* mainly Nigeria. By contrast, 
suspects from African countries appear relatively infrequently in statistics of 
the Public Prosecution Service: of the 311 suspects in 2012, only a small per-
centage (2.6 per cent) came from African countries (Morocco being an excep-
tion) ([2], pp. 133, 195-197 and 211-212). This finding is notable in view of 
the fact that several authors have pointed out that trafficked persons and 
offenders often come from the same region ([78], p. 50; [79], p. 51). 

Most remarkable is the finding that from 2012 onwards fewer citizens of 
 African countries seem to have been identified and registered ([2], pp. 34-36). 

* This group did not include the inhabitants of North Africa (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, the 
Sudan, Tunis and Western Sahara) ([2], p. 311).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   28 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 29

However, it is unknown whether there are actually fewer citizens of African 
countries trafficked in the Netherlands. It is equally possible that they are 
concealing themselves more than before or that less attention is being devoted 
to identifying and reporting them. Perhaps the declined number correlates 
with the demotivation for investigating human trafficking situations involving 
trafficked citizens of African countries because there generally seem to be 
insufficient investigative leads in such cases. Their complaints would impose 
a strain on the resources of the police and the Public Prosecution Service 
because the complaints would have to be processed and what few leads there 
are must be investigated ([80], p. 180). 

Relatively little is known about human trafficking situations in the Nether-
lands involving trafficked persons from African countries. The National Rap-
porteur has stressed in several of her reports that the absence of sufficient 
investigative leads does not necessarily preclude the possibility of human traf-
ficking ([2], pp. 109, 133, 197 and 257; [9], p. 175; [80], p. 617). The remark-
able statistics have led to the conclusion that more quantitative and in-depth 
qualitative research is needed in order to discern trends and links in human 
trafficking stories ([2], p. 257). Examples of such research can be found in 
other countries, for example in Belgium, where an anthropological research 
has been conducted into 48 judicial files, among which 27 files are Nigerian 
and 21 are Moroccan. This explorative research provides valuable insight into 
African human trafficking networks that operate internationally (also in the 
Netherlands) and, in terms of their modus operandi, differ from Eastern 
European human trafficking networks [81]. 

Conclusions 

Statistics are important for reinforcing viewpoints and may form the basis for 
sound decisions in the enactment and implementation of policies. However, 
positions are sometimes taken on the basis of unverifiable, unreliable or inac-
curate data [3]. Scale statistics are often sought in order to demonstrate the 
supposedly alarming scale of human trafficking or in support of a particular 
policy on prostitution. In recent years, various studies have attempted to esti-
mate the total scale of human trafficking; however, at the moment, reliable 
and accurate estimates are absent. The existing estimates seem to take on a 
life of their own ([32], p. 30) in politics, in academic literature and in the 
media. In such cases, statistics do the opposite of what is intended: to provide 
reliable information. 

The authors of this article have suggested a shift in perspective from scale 
statistics towards statistics on the nature of human trafficking at a lower level 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   29 25/06/2015   11:16:52



30 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

of aggregation (see also Weitzer ([23], p. 15) and Zhang and others [24]), in 
the absence of reliable estimates on the total scale of human trafficking. Sta-
tistics often reflect the human trafficking that is visible and the measures that 
are taken to combat human trafficking. There are three ways in which statis-
tics can be of the utmost importance in the fight against human trafficking: 
first, to guide the measures taken to combat human trafficking (evidence-
based policy); second, to expose bottlenecks that may be used as a basis for 
suggestions to initiate more efficient policy and implementation; and third, to 
be used as a starting point for further research providing answers to questions 
such as why certain aspects still seem to be underexposed in the fight against 
human trafficking. In conclusion, the authors of this article encourage the 
collection and analysis of quantitative data in microlevel settings (see also 
Weitzer [23]). By doing so, efforts to tackle human trafficking can be adapted 
to particular contexts and policymaking can be done in a more appropriate 
manner. Furthermore, academics are encouraged not to rely on current esti-
mates (or to reproduce them) but to initiate data collection and analysis 
within the framework of the relevance of statistics such as has been presented 
in this article. 

References 

 1. National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against 
Children, Trafficking in Human Beings: Visible and Invisible — A Quantitative Report 
2007-2011 (The Hague, Bureau Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel, 2012). 

 2. National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence 
against Children, Mensenhandel In en Uit Beeld II. Cijfermatige rapportage 2008-2012 
(The Hague, Bureau Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel, 2014).

 3. National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence 
against Children, “Does legalised prostitution generate more human trafficking?” 
(The Hague, National Rapporteur, 2013).

 4. National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against 
Children, Trafficking in Human Beings: Case Law on Trafficking in Human Beings 2009-
2012 — An Analysis (The Hague, Bureau National Rapporteur Mensenhandel, 2012). 

 5. International Labour Organization, “ILO global estimate of forced labour: 
results and methodology” (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2012). 

 6. Hard to See, Harder to Count: Survey Guidelines to Estimate Forced Labour of Adults 
and Children (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2012). 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   30 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 31

 7. Walk Free Foundation, Global Slavery Index 2013. Available at www.
globalslaveryindex.org.

 8. Ronald Weitzer, “Sex trafficking and the sex industry: the need for evidence-
based theory and legislation”, Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, vol. 101, 
No. 4 (2012), pp. 1337-1369.

 9. National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence 
against Children, Mensenhandel: Negende Rapportage van de Nationaal Rapporteur (The 
Hague, Bureau Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel, 2013). 

10. Moral Noshad Sharifi, “21 miljoen mensen leven in slavernij”, 8 March 2014. 
Available at www.nrc.nl/next/van/2014/maart/08/21-miljoen-mensen-leven-in-slavernij- 
1353356.

11. Laura L. Shoaps, “Room for improvement: Palermo Protocol and the Trafficking 
Victims Protection Act”, Lewis and Clark Law Review, vol. 17, No. 3 (2014), pp. 931-972.

12. Monti N. Datta and K. Bales, “Slavery in Europe: part 1, estimating the dark 
figure”, Human Rights Quarterly, vol. 35, No. 4 (November 2013), pp. 817-829.

13. Marieke Bottenberg and others, Seksuele Uitbuiting: Criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse 
(Woerden, Korps landelijk politiediensten/Dienst Nationale Recherche, 2012). 

14. FairWork, “Verborgen slavernij in Nederland” (Amsterdam, 2012).

15. Fabrizio Sarrica, “Measuring trafficking in persons”, in Forum on Crime and 
Society (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.12.IV.10), pp. 3-18.

16. Michaëlla de Cock, “Directions for national and international data collection on 
forced labour”, Working Paper, No. 30 (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2007).

17. Mike Dottridge, Deserving Trust: Issues of Accountability for Human Right NGOs 
Draft Report for Consultation (Geneva, International Council on Human Rights Policy, 
2003).

18. Amy Farrell and others, Review of Existing Estimates of Victims of Human 
Trafficking in the United States and Recommendations for Improving Research and 
Measurement of Human Trafficking (Washington, D.C., Humanity United, 2009).

19. Jo Goodey, “Human trafficking: sketchy data and policy responses”, Criminology 
and Criminal Justice, vol. 8, No. 4 (2008), pp. 421-442.

20. Amanda J. Gould, “From pseudoscience to protoscience: estimating human 
trafficking and modern forms of slavery”, paper submitted to the Second Annual 
Interdisciplinary Conference on Human Trafficking, October 2010. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   31 25/06/2015   11:16:52



32 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

21. Erin O’Brien, “Dark numbers: challenges in measuring human trafficking”, 
Dialogue e-Journal, vol. 7, No. 2 (2012). 

22. Gury Tyldum, “Limitations in research on human trafficking”, International 
Migration, vol. 48, No. 5 (October 2010), pp. 1-13.

23. Ronald Weitzer, “New directions in research on human trafficking”, The Annals 
of the American Academy of Political Social Science, vol. 653, No. 1 (May 2014), pp. 6-24. 

24. Sheldon X. Zhang and others, “Estimating labor trafficking among unauthor-
ized migrant workers in San Diego”, The Annals of the American Academy of Political 
and Social Science, vol. 653, No. 1 (May 2014), pp. 65-86.

25. G. Tyldum and A. Brunovskis, “Describing the unobserved: methodological 
challenges in empirical studies on human trafficking”, International Migration,  
vol. 43, Nos. 1-2 (January 2005), pp. 17-34. 

26. Frank Bovenkerk and Willemien Hogewind, “De ‘levende’ statistiek van de 
moorddadige dood”, in Discretie in het Strafrecht, M. Boone and others, eds. (The 
Hague, Boom Juridische uitgevers, 2004), pp. 9-22. 

27. Terry L. Penney, “Dark figure of crime (problems of estimation)”, in The 
Encyclopedia of Criminology and Criminal Justice, Jay. S. Albanese, ed. (Chichester, West 
Sussex, Wiley Blackwell, 2014). 

28. John Tierney, Criminology: Theory and Context, 3rd ed. (New York, Routledge, 
2013).

29. United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574. 

30. Frank Laczko and Marco A. Gramegna, “Developing better indicators of human 
trafficking”, Brown Journal of World Affairs, vol. X, No. 1 (summer/fall 2003), pp. 179-194.

31. UNODC, Abuse of a Position of Vulnerability and Other “Means” within the 
Definition of Trafficking in Persons, Issue Paper (Vienna, 2013). 

32. Michael Jandl, “Research on trafficking in persons: gaps and limitations in crime 
and criminal justice data”, in Forum on Crime and Society, vol. 7 (2008) (United 
Nations publication, Sales No. E.12.IV.10), pp. 29-40.

33. Beate Andrees, “Why definitions matter”, 3 February 2014. Available at  
www.ilo.org/.

34. Marcelo F. Aebi and others, European Sourcebook of Crime and Criminal Justice 
Statistics, 4th ed. (The Hague, Boom Juridische uitgevers, 2010).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   32 25/06/2015   11:16:52



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 33

35. Marcelo F. Aebi, “Methodological issues in the comparison of police-recorded 
crime rates”, in International Handbook of Criminology, Shlomo G. Shoham, Paul 
Knepper and Martin Kett, eds. (Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press, 2010), pp. 211-228. 

36. Richard R. Bennett, and James P. Lynch, J “Does a difference make a difference? 
Comparing cross-national crime indicators”, Criminology, vol. 28, No. 1 (2009), 
pp. 153-182.

37. David P. Farrington, Patrick A. Langan and Michael H. Tonry, Cross-National 
Studies in Crime and Justice (Washington, D.C., United States Department of Justice, 
Office of Justice Programs, Bureau of Justice Statistics, 2004). 

38. Gregory Howard and Tony Smith, “Understanding cross-national variations of 
crime rates in Europe and North America”, in Crime and Criminal Justice in Europe 
and North America 1995-1997: Report on the Sixth United Nations Survey on Crime 
Trends and Criminal Justice Systems, Kauko Aromaa and others, eds., HEUNI 
Publication Series, No. 40 (Helsinki, European Institute for Crime Prevention and 
Control, affiliated with the United Nations, 2003), pp. 23-70. 

39. Rodrigo R. Soares, “Development, crime and punishment: accounting for the 
international differences in crime rates”, Journal of Development Economics, vol. 73, 
No. 1 (2004), pp. 155-184.

40. Laura M. Agustín, Sex at the Margins: Migration, Labour Markets and the Rescue 
Industry (London, Zed Books, 2007).

41. Jo Doezema, “Forced to choose: beyond the voluntary v. forced prostitution 
dichotomy”, in Global Sex Workers. Rights, Resistance, and Redefinition, Kamal Kempadoo 
and Jo Doezema, eds. (New York, Routledge, 1998), pp. 34-50. 

42. Ratna Kapur, “The tragedy of victimization rhetoric: resurrecting the ‘native’ 
subject in international post-colonial feminist legal politics”, Harvard Human Rights 
Journal, vol. 15, 2002, pp. 1-38.

43. Julia O’Connell Davidson, “Will the real sex slave please stand up?” Feminist 
Review, vol. 83, 2006, pp. 4-22. 

44. Julia O’Connell Davidson, “New slavery, old binaries: human trafficking and 
the borders of freedom”, Global Networks, vol. 10, No. 2 (April 2010), pp. 244-261.

45. Brenda C. Oude Breuil, “Precious children in a heartless world? The complexi-
ties of child trafficking in Marseille”, Children and Society, vol. 22, No. 3 (May 2008), 
pp. 223-234.

46. Jayashri Srikantiah, “Perfect victims and real survivors: the iconic victim in 
domestic human trafficking law”, Boston University Law Review, vol. 87, No. 1 
(February 2007), pp. 157-212.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   33 25/06/2015   11:16:52



34 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

47. Seo-Young Cho, Axel Dreher and Eric Neumayer, “Does legalised prostitution 
increase human trafficking?”, World Development, vol. 41, No. 1 (January 2013), pp. 67-82. 

48. Andrea Di Nicola and others, Study on National Legislation on Prostitution and the 
Trafficking in Women and Children (Brussels, European Parliament, 2005). 

49. Niklas Jakobsson and Andreas Kotsadam, “The law and economics of inter-
national sex slavery: prostitution laws and trafficking for sexual exploitation”, European 
Journal of Law and Economics, vol. 35, No. 1 (February 2013), pp. 87-107.

50. Janice G. Raymond, “Ten reasons for not legalizing prostitution and a legal 
response to the demand for prostitution”, Journal of Trauma Practice, vol. 2, Nos. 3 and 4 
(2004), pp. 315-232.

51. Patrick Belser, Michaëlle de Cock and Farhad Mehran, “ILO minimum esti-
mate of forced labour in the world” (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2005).

52. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Trafficking in Persons: Global Patterns 
(Vienna, 2006). 

53. Gergana Danailova-Trainor and Patrick Belser, “Globalization and the illicit 
market for human trafficking: an empirical analysis of supply and demand”, Working 
Paper, No. 53 (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2006).

54. Thomas M. Steinfatt and Simon Baker, Measuring the Extent of Sex Trafficking in 
Cambodia: 2008 (Bangkok, United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human 
Trafficking, 2011). 

55. Thomas M. Steinfatt, “Measuring the number of trafficked women and children 
in Cambodia: a direct observation field study”, part III of a series, October 2003. 

56. Denise Brennan, “Methodological challenges in research with trafficked persons: 
tales from the field”, International Migration, vol. 43, Nos. 1 and 2 (2005), pp. 35-54.

57. European Commission, “Communication from the Commission to the 
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions: delivering an area of freedom, security and justice 
for Europe’s citizens — Action plan implementing the Stockholm Programme”, 
COM(2010)171, 20 May 2010. Available at http://europa.eu/. 

58. European Commission, “Communication from the Commission to the 
European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee 
and the Committee of the Regions: The EU strategy towards the eradication of traf-
ficking in human beings 2012-2016”, COM (2012)286, 19 June 2012. Available at 
Available at http://europa.eu/. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   34 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Extremely wanted: human trafficking statistics—what to do with the hodgepodge of numbers? 35

59. “Directive 2011/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 
5 April 2011 on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting 
its victims, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA”, Official Journal 
of the European Union, No. 101 L, 15 April 2011. Available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/.

60. Erica J. Hashimoto, “Class matters”, Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 
vol. 101, No. 1 (2011), pp. 31-76.

61. Rianne Verwijs and others, Loverboys en Hun Slachtoffers: Inzicht in Aard en 
Omvang Problematiek en in het Aanbod aan Hulpverlening en Opvang (Utrecht, Verwey 
Jonker Instituut, 2011). 

62. Alexis A. Aronowitz, Human Trafficking, Human Misery: The Global Trade in 
Human Beings, Global Crime and Justice Series (Westport, Connecticut, Praeger, 
2009).

63. Mark Latonero and others, Human Trafficking Online: The Role of Social Networking 
Sites and Online Classifieds, Research Series (University of Southern California, 
September 2011). 

64. Mark Latonero and others, The Rise of Mobile and the Diffusion of Technology-
Facilitated Trafficking, Research Series on Technology and Human Trafficking 
(University of Southern California, November 2012). 

65. T. Mitali and D. Boyd, “Networked trafficking: reflections on technology and 
the anti-trafficking movement”, Dialectical Anthropology, vol. 37, No. 2 (2013), 
pp. 277-290.

66. Danah Boyd and others, “Human trafficking and technology: a framework for 
understanding the role of technology in the commercial exploitation of children in the 
U.S.” (Microsoft Research, 2011).

67. David Ingram, “FBI arrests 150 in three days in sex-trafficking sweep”, 29 July 
2013. Available at www.reuters.com/article/2013/07/29/us-usa-crime-prostitution-
idUSBRE96S0NC20130729. 

68. Louise Shelley, Human Trafficking: A Global Perspective (New York, Cambridge 
University Press, 2010). 

69. Richard H.J.M. Staring, “Human trafficking in the Netherlands: trends and 
recent developments”, International Review of Law, Computers and Technology, vol. 26, 
No. 1 (2012), pp. 59-72. 

70. M. Verhoeven and B. van Gestel, “Relaties tussen verdachten en slachtoffers en 
de opsporing van mensenhandel”, Cahiers Politiestudies, vol. 28 (2013), pp. 93-108. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   35 25/06/2015   11:16:53



36 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

71. Rebecca Surtees, “Traffickers and trafficking in Southern and Eastern Europe: 
considering the other side of human trafficking”, European Journal of Criminology, 
vol. 5, No. 1 (2008), pp. 39-68.

72. De Rechtspraak, “Oriëntatiepunten voor straftoemeting en LOVS-afspraken” 
(Bijgewerkt, November 2014). 

73. United States Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual (Washington, D.C., 
November 2013). 

74. William R. Maynard, “‘Human trafficking’ under the sentencing guidelines”, 
Federal Sentencing Reporter, vol. 14, No. 5 (2002), pp. 315-318. 

75. Kathleen A. McKee, “It’s 10:00 P.M. Do you know where your children are?” 
Regent University Law Review, vol. 23, No. 2 (2010), pp. 311-342. 

76. Maria B. Álvarez and Edward J. Alessi, “Human trafficking is more than sex traf-
ficking and prostitution: implications for social work”, Affilia, vol. 27, No. 2 (May 2012), 
pp. 142-152.

77. Janie A. Chuang, “Rescuing trafficking from ideological capture: prostitution 
reform and anti-trafficking law and policy”, University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 
vol. 158, No. 6 (May 2010), pp. 1655-1728.

78. Eurostat, Trafficking in Human Beings, Methodologies and Working Papers 
(Luxembourg, Publications Office of the European Union, 2013). 

79. Global Report on Trafficking in Persons, 2012 (United Nations publications, Sales 
No. E.13.IV.1). 

80. National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings, Trafficking in Human 
Beings: Seventh Report of the Dutch National Rapporteur (The Hague, Bureau Nationaal 
Rapporteur Mensenhandel, 2009). 

81. J. Leman and S. Janssens, “Creative adaptive criminal entrepreneurs from Africa 
and human trafficking in Belgium: case studies of traffickers from Nigeria and 
Morocco”, International Journal of Criminology and Sociology, vol. 2, 2013, pp. 153-162.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   36 25/06/2015   11:16:53



37

COUNTING LABOUR TRAFFICKING ACTIVITIES: AN 
EMPIRICAL ATTEMPT AT STANDARDIZED MEASUREMENT 

By Sheldon X. Zhang* and Li Cai**

Abstract

Research on human trafficking faces many challenges, one of which is the lack 
of consistent measurement. Although there have been efforts throughout the 
world to collect primary data, researchers have not come close to finding a 
common set of measures that can be applied consistently in counting traffick-
ing activities or victimization experiences. The development of a common 
data-collection instrument, especially one that is appealing to researchers in 
different countries, is no easy task. The authors present one such example in 
this article, for all to comment on and improve. This instrument, created a 
few years ago in an empirical study on labour trafficking in the United States 
of America, is intended for use in large-scale surveys by persons engaged in 
research or gathering data for estimating prevalence. The instrument has 
received excellent empirical validation, including item response analysis, and 
has been adopted in a few other studies. While the instrument is still in need 
of improvement, the authors would like to publicize their efforts so that oth-
ers may draw lessons from and build upon what has been accomplished. 
Although individual circumstances may vary, human trafficking shares suffi-
cient commonalities to allow standardized measurement. A common instru-
ment is a crucial step towards meaningful international or cross-regional 
comparison, which is sorely missing in the current policy discourse on human 
trafficking.

Keywords: labour exploitation, labour trafficking, migration, migrant worker, 
respondent-driven sampling, trafficking in persons, United States of America

Background

By all accounts from either government agencies or international organiza-
tions, human trafficking is a serious global problem. International organiza-
tions and the Government of the United States of America claim that tens of 

* San Diego State University, California, United States of America.
** University of California, Los Angeles, United States.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   37 25/06/2015   11:16:53



38 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

millions of people are trafficked throughout the world for purposes of sexual 
exploitation and labour exploitation [1-5]. Bales ([6], p. 9) estimated 27 million 
slaves worldwide, the majority of whom were bonded labourers in  Bangladesh, 
India, Nepal and Pakistan. In 2005, the International Labour Organization 
(ILO) estimated that there were at least 12.3 million people in forced labour 
worldwide [7]. About 2.5 million of these are forced to work by the state, the 
army or rebel military groups. The remaining 9.8 million are exploited by 
private agents and enterprises. Of these, only about 1.4 million (or 14 per cent) 
are in commercial sexual exploitation, while most (7.8 million) are in forced 
labour exploitation. 

In a more recent study, ILO [8] updated its estimates of global trafficking 
victimization based on an analysis of published reports and accounts of iden-
tified victims. ILO used two teams of researchers to conduct separate coding 
schemes to verify all reported cases. Using the capture-recapture method, 
ILO put the total number of forced labourers at 20.9 million, 18.7 million 
(90  per cent) of whom were exploited by individual employers or private 
enterprises [8]. More specifically, among these estimated victims, 4.5 million 
(22 per cent of the total) were victims of forced sexual exploitation, and 
14.2 million (68 per cent) were victims of forced labour, in economic activi-
ties such as agriculture, construction, domestic work and manufacturing.

Despite these grim estimates, labour trafficking has not gained much trac-
tion compared with sex trafficking among either the research or advocacy 
communities. Sex trafficking has remained front and centre ever since the 
beginning of the larger anti-trafficking movement [9]. In an exhaustive 
review of existing literature, Farrell and others [10] identified 110 sources 
that provided a count or some estimates of human trafficking. The vast 
majority of those counts referred to sex trafficking or the sexual exploitation 
of children. Only 17 sources provided information from which a count or 
estimate of labour trafficking could be inferred ([10], p. 16). In their review 
of nine reports from service organizations, Logan, Walker and Hunt [11] 
found the same scarcity of empirical data on human trafficking in general 
and labour trafficking in particular. In fact, there is so much attention focused 
on sex trafficking that some researchers have come to believe that the most 
common form of human trafficking involves sexual exploitation [12]. Even 
the United States Government has claimed for years that the majority of 
transnational victims are women and children “trafficked into commercial 
sexual exploitation” [5]. In a comprehensive review of literature, Gozdziak 
and Bump ([9], p. 7) lamented that current research had focused on sex traf-
ficking almost “to the detriment of investigating trafficking for bonded labor 
and domestic servitude”. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   38 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 39

For many years, a growing number of researchers have become concerned 
about the heavy focus on sex trafficking and have advocated a shift in research 
and policy discourse [13]. For instance, Belser [14] points out that the major-
ity of human economic activities, forced or otherwise, are not concerned with 
sex. The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) also acknow-
ledges the uneven coverage and believes that the greater problem of forced 
labour and domestic servitude has been largely ignored. In a UNODC sur-
vey, trafficking activities were identified in 52 countries, and 79 per cent of 
the victims had been subjected to sexual exploitation. UNODC believes that 
the underdetection of labour trafficking was universal across regions and even 
countries ([1], p. 11). The limited knowledge about labour trafficking has 
long caught the attention of international organizations including UNODC, 
the International Labour Organization (ILO) ([2], [3]) and the International 
Organization for Migration [4]. The United States Department of Justice 
([15], p. 2), in its Assessment of U.S. Government Efforts to Combat Trafficking in 
Persons in Fiscal Year 2006, called for enhanced efforts “to monitor and com-
bat labor trafficking both domestically and internationally, especially in 
light of the new mandate in the 2005 TVPRA [Trafficking Victims Protection 
 Reauthorization Act] concerning forced labor and child labor”.

The existing literature on human trafficking, in addition to overemphasizing 
sex trafficking, suffers from an acute case of “empirical anaemia”—lack of 
primary data collection based on sound sampling procedures. For instance, 
after reviewing 207 publications of various types, Farrell and others [10] 
found that nearly all the counts or estimates of human trafficking were based 
on trafficking cases identified in published documents, mainly in United 
States and international news reports; and over 80 per cent of the identified 
sources failed to indicate the sources that led to their estimates. The poor 
quality and documentation of procedures used to arrive at any estimates cre-
ate “enormous uncertainty” about the scope of the problem and leave any 
such estimates open to challenge ([10], p. vi). In a recent ILO publication, 
reference was made to the methodological inadequacies of the annual report 
providing global estimates of trafficking victims, particularly in dealing with 
missing values and quality problems in the original data ([16], p. 8). 

The problem of estimating the scope and nature of labour trafficking has 
been recognized by international organizations and the United States Gov-
ernment. One common feature in current trafficking literature is its heavy 
reliance on prosecuted cases or secondary sources rather than on primary 
data collection, which underscores the difficulties and challenges inherent in 
this type of empirical research. The challenges of producing estimates of the 
scale of human trafficking are well understood ([17], [18]). As a result, ILO 
[3] called for high priority to be given to the development of field and 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   39 25/06/2015   11:16:53



40 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

statistical techniques to support actions against forced labour and human 
trafficking. In the 2005 Global Report under the Follow-up to the ILO Declaration 
on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work ([2], p. 86), it is stated that the 
absence of reliable forced labour statistics at the national level prevents the 
establishment of benchmarks “by which progress can be measured over time”. 
UNODC has also called for the establishment of a continuing international 
mechanism to gather data on the true size of the trafficking market and to 
monitor trends and patterns of trafficking in persons [1]. The International 
Organization for Migration has also called for improved data collection and  
data-based analysis as the basis for guiding public policy [19]. The United 
States Government Accountability Office, after issuing a critical report ques-
tioning the methodologies used in the report of the Department of State on 
trafficking in persons, called for the development of reliable and empirically 
based indicators to better identify human trafficking activities. 

Challenges in trafficking research

The need for and challenges in producing estimates on the scale of human 
trafficking have been widely discussed ([17], [18], [20], [21]). Among the 
multitude of conceptual and methodological challenges in human trafficking 
research, two stand out: (a) definitional problems; and (b) representative 
sampling. In other words, what are to be counted as trafficking violations 
instead of just abusive or exploitative labour practices, and where are the vic-
tims to be found? In this article, the authors have presented an example of 
how to define and operationalize labour trafficking and have constructed an 
instrument to standardize the measurement. 

The messy business of defining labour trafficking

There remains much ambiguity and uncertainty as to what constitutes labour 
trafficking, or human trafficking in general. Farrell and others [22] found that 
most law enforcement agencies do not even recognize the existence of labour 
trafficking. Definitional ambiguity impedes efforts in operationalizing meas-
ures that are needed in data collection. There has been a lack of concerted 
efforts in translating established legal frameworks into workable measures or 
survey instruments to assist empirical research. There are currently no stand-
ardized or even widely accepted survey instruments within the United States 
that can be used for data-gathering purposes. 

The absence of a common definition has long plagued the development of 
empirical measures on human trafficking. Some countries and their legal sys-
tems do not even recognize the existence of labour trafficking ([23], p. 2). 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   40 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 41

Without a common conceptual and legal framework, international collabora-
tion is difficult. The lack of shared definitions also prevents the gathering of 
data that can be used in comparative studies, thus further hampering policy 
development. Many countries mix trafficking, smuggling and irregular migra-
tion in their official data-collection efforts [20]. For instance, as late as 2004, 
the confusion between smuggling and trafficking and the misuse of the two 
terms caused the United States Immigration and Customs Enforcement, the 
lead federal agency on immigration control, to mislabel many cases, thus 
erroneously inflating the total number of trafficking investigations and arrests 
([24], p. 12). 

The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Espe-
cially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention 
against Transnational Organized Crime, opened for signature in Palermo, 
Italy, in December 2000, helped clarify the issue by introducing two essential 
elements to the definition of human trafficking—the use of either force or 
fraud in extracting labour to achieve monetary gains [25]. However, the Pro-
tocol did not end the debate on the definition, because human trafficking in 
practice often involves multiple stages and individuals, from recruitment to 
transportation, and from harbouring to employment [20]. The diverse situa-
tions in which players of varied interests enter and exit the process of traffick-
ing make it difficult to tell when smuggling ends and trafficking begins, or 
when voluntary participation becomes coerced or deceived. 

To complicate the matter further, different countries have also developed 
their own operational definitions. For instance, in the United States, legal 
definitions of sex trafficking and labour trafficking are provided in section 103, 
paragraph 8, of the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 
[26], in which the term ‘‘severe forms of trafficking in persons’’ is defined 
as follows:

“(a) Sex trafficking in which a commercial sex act is induced by force, 
fraud, or coercion, or in which the person induced to perform such act has 
not attained 18 years of age; or

“(b) The recruitment, harboring, transportation, provision, or obtaining 
of a person for labor or services, through the use of force, fraud, or coercion for 
the purpose of subjection to involuntary servitude, peonage, debt bondage,  
or slavery.”

ILO has for years applied its own definition to highlight the labour perspec-
tive. The genesis of the ILO definition can be traced back to its Forced Labour 
Convention, 1930 (No. 29), in which forced or compulsory labour was 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   41 25/06/2015   11:16:53



42 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

defined as “all work or service which is exacted from any person under the 
menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself 
voluntarily” [27]. Two key elements in this definition are involuntariness and 
the penalty or menace of a penalty. ILO also drew a link between forced 
labour and human trafficking, arguing that the definition of trafficking in 
persons in article 3 of the Trafficking in Persons Protocol complements the 
ILO definition. However, ILO ([27], p. 19) acknowledged the various inter-
pretations of the Trafficking in Persons Protocol that had been developed by 
Governments, international organizations and other stakeholders in their 
laws, policies and practices. 

Although ILO sees few differences between the two legal frameworks, its 
efforts in operationalizing data-collection instruments recognize the slippery 
elements of movement across national borders and the involvement of a third 
party as implied in the terminology “trafficking” ([27], p. 19). While the inclu-
sion of such elements may assist law enforcement agencies in separating “traf-
ficked” from “non-trafficked” victims, leading to different policy responses, 
ILO has decided not to adopt a position on this issue. Furthermore, ILO has 
clarified that forced labour can happen to all workers, irrespective of the 
employment relationship. In other words, people on contracted jobs or self-
employed vendors can also be subjected to forced labour because “recruiters 
and employers increasingly oblige workers to adopt the legal status of ‘self-
employed’, thus disguising the underlying employment relationship” ([27], 
p. 13). 

In general, ILO offers a more precise, albeit narrower, definition of what con-
stitutes labour trafficking than the Trafficking in Persons Protocol. The ILO 
definition places greater emphasis on the victims’ subjective assessment of 
their circumstances, as opposed to the judgement of third parties such as 
researchers or advocacy groups. In its most recent technical guideline to assist 
the global estimation of forced labour, ILO once again sought to clarify the 
legal and operational definitions of forced labour and cautioned that national 
laws often differ from the international definitions ([27], p. 11). In practice, 
many researchers apply a range of definitions to their data: some do not 
explicitly distinguish between labour and sex trafficking, while others include 
additional provisions or language [28]. Researchers such as Bales ([29], [30]) 
and Kara [31] see few differences in these terms or they see no need to dif-
ferentiate them and opt instead to highlight the theme that they all share—the 
control of one person over another and the complete power of the employer 
to determine working conditions, remuneration and contract terms. In fact, 
Kara ([31], p. 67) is against replacing “slavery” with “forced labour” and 
“slave trade” with “human trafficking” because the terms weaken the moral 
intensity required to mount effective campaigns against those crimes.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   42 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 43

Current state of labour trafficking measurement

The lack of clarity in the definition of labour trafficking also hampers the 
development of measurement for empirical studies, although there have been 
independent efforts to construct so-called trafficking indictors. There remains 
a major gap between what is known conceptually and what specific questions 
must be asked in a survey to gather information on labour trafficking victimi-
zation. Both ILO and the International Organization for Migration have in 
various publications claimed to be conducting studies on labour trafficking in 
different parts of the world. Thus far, they have not published any specific 
survey instruments so others may learn and adopt. However, several of their 
publications have listed specific categories or items that suggest the domains 
of information to be considered and how such instruments should be con-
structed. For example, the Handbook on Anti-Trafficking Data Collection in 
South-Eastern Europe, developed by the International Centre for Migration 
Policy Development, provides guidelines for constructing “victim-centred” or 
“trafficker-centred” databases; the handbook suggests that forms of traffick-
ing include “sexual exploitation, forced labour, begging, delinquency, adop-
tion, removal of organs,” and proper values such as “sexual, physical, 
psychological” for entries in the databases ([32], pp. 58-59, 73, 78 and 176).

The most elaborate attempt to operationalize indicators of human trafficking 
has been made by ILO [33].* Using the Delphi method, essentially a consen-
sus-building exercise among selected experts, ILO conducted two surveys in 
2008 to establish a list of operational indicators of trafficking victimization. 
The Delphi panellists were selected from police, government, academic and 
research entities, non-governmental organizations, international organiza-
tions, labour and trade organizations and judiciaries in 27 European Union 
member States. Specific indicators were developed along six dimensions 
graded as “strong,” “medium” or “weak”: (a) deceptive recruitment; (b) coer-
cive recruitment; (c) recruitment by abuse of vulnerability; (d) exploitative 
conditions of work; (e) coercion at destination; and (f) abuse of vulnerability 
at destination. ILO also determined that, to qualify as a trafficking victim, a 
combination of the “experiences” or levels of intensity (i.e. strong, medium or 
weak) is needed—an exercise similar to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders used by mental health professionals in the United States 
to render a clinical diagnosis. Such an elaborate screening and intake process 
requires well-trained staff and ample time, something most survey research-
ers cannot afford. 

* An updated technical manuscript on measuring labour trafficking was issued by ILO in 2011.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   43 25/06/2015   11:16:53



44 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

San Diego labour trafficking instrument

Between 2009 and 2012, a labour trafficking study, funded by the United 
States Department of Justice, was carried out by a research team in San 
Diego, California. The main goal of the study was to apply the respondent-
driven sampling method to estimate the prevalence of labour trafficking 
among undocumented migrant labourers in San Diego County [34]. An 
instrument had to be developed for screening purposes. At the time of the 
study, no instruments were available in any open source, so the research team 
had to develop its own, based on a review of existing literature, interpretation 
of different legal frameworks and a series of focus groups. 

Instrument development

An immediate challenge that confronted the San Diego research team in the 
construction of the measurement instrument was whether to conceptualize 
human trafficking as an incident or a state of existence. By convention, crime 
has mostly been studied on an incident basis. For instance, every crime, 
whether it is a burglary or a robbery, is counted as an incident, where a single 
occurrence will suffice for definitional purposes. It is not so simple when it 
comes to defining human trafficking, especially labour trafficking, in which 
victimization is often presumed to have lasted for some time. While the crimi-
nal justice system in the United States is now charged with the primary 
responsibility of fighting human trafficking, the conceptualization and clarifi-
cation of the nature of this crime are not well developed. Another challenge in 
the San Diego study was the requirement of an instrument to be applied to a 
large sample so that quantitative data could be captured in consistency for the 
purpose of estimating the prevalence of the trafficking problem. 

It is beyond the scope of this article to sort out the conceptual nuances on 
whether human trafficking as a crime should be incident-based (i.e. a particu-
lar event) or state-based (i.e. a type of existence); however, it should be noted 
that the San Diego team was fully aware of the many challenges at the time 
that it developed its instrument. In its effort to reconcile this conceptual 
dilemma, the San Diego team opted for a structure that would capture both. 
As a result, the basic format of the San Diego labour trafficking instrument is 
modelled on the questionnaire format used in the international self-report 
delinquency study—a format first developed by criminologists from 15 coun-
tries in the late 1980s [35-37]. Because that format has gone through numer-
ous field applications for more than two decades and become a widely adopted 
standardized instrument for measuring delinquent and criminal behaviour, 
this study borrowed its basic structure, which is designed to measure both the 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   44 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 45

prevalence (i.e. the extent of the problem) and the incidence (i.e. the fre-
quency of victimization) of trafficking activities. 

Measurement domains

The survey questionnaire was intended to capture different trafficking viola-
tions (those that qualify under both international and United States Govern-
ment definitions of human trafficking), as well as abusive or exploitative 
labour practices. The San Diego labour trafficking instrument contains both 
structured and open-ended items. Structured questions aim at capturing 
common elements for statistical analysis, such as demographics, trafficking 
and exploitation experiences and the respondent’s financial situation. Open-
ended questions are intended to capture unique incidents of victimization. 
The instrument covers the following domains of information: 

• Demographical characteristics: age, marital status, number of chil-
dren (if any), education, place of birth, family members in the home 
country and the United States, length of time in San Diego and the 
United States

• Work and earnings: measured for the past month, followed by more 
general history over the past 12 months, and prior to and after arrival 
in the United States; the amount of money made in those periods, the 
amount saved and/or the amount remitted to the home country 

• Employment activities in San Diego: emphasis placed on interactions 
with employers, wage negotiations and payment methods 

• Various measures of trafficking victimization and labour exploitation, 
including: not being paid for work performed, receiving bad checks, 
being underpaid, being abandoned at work, hazardous work condi-
tions, extended hours without compensation, no breaks, verbal and/
or physical abuse or threats of abuse, confiscation of documents and 
restriction of freedom of movement

• Migration decision: the circumstances under which the subject came 
to know his or her recruiter and trafficker, the characteristics of the 
recruiter, terms and conditions between the subject and the recruiter, 
and the types of arrangements for embarking on the journey*

* Although it is assumed that most subjects wanted to come to the United States, it is unclear 
whether at the time of making the decision to migrate they had any idea of the abuse and exploitation 
that they might have to face when crossing the border.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   45 25/06/2015   11:16:53



46 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

•  Transportation stage: description of the trip, including way stations, 
stopovers or layovers, length of time and conditions of travel 

Trafficking violations and abusive practices 

Because of the overlapping nature of trafficking violations and labour exploi-
tation, the San Diego team took the approach of constructing a wide range of 
items to capture different levels of human rights violations and unfair treat-
ment of undocumented migrants. Furthermore, because the target popula-
tion was undocumented migrant labourers, consideration was given as to 
whether the violations or abuses took place: (a) during illegal migration; or 
(b) at the workplace in the United States. 

Two broad, though sometimes overlapping, categories of measures were 
constructed in the survey instrument—trafficking violations and abusive 
practices. To reduce possible definitional confusion and for the sake of con-
ceptual clarity, a conservative (or narrow) interpretation of what constitutes 
“trafficking” was adopted in this study. To qualify for trafficking violations, 
the nature of the victimization must include actual or threatened infringe-
ment of freedom of movement (e.g. holding a migrant hostage in order to 
extort ransom during transportation) or actual or threatened violation of the 
person’s physical integrity (e.g. physical or sexual assault). Everything else 
was grouped under the category of abusive practices. Most of these measures 
are in line with the United States Government’s interpretation of what con-
stitutes labour trafficking, since they are taken directly from the two pam-
phlets issued by the federal agencies primarily responsible for current 
anti- trafficking programmes. 

Two items (items 020 and 070) were specifically designed to capture the traf-
ficking nature of any violations that happened during the transportation phase 
(see table 1). Another 19 items (items 090 through 270) were designed to 
capture trafficking violations at the workplace. 

Measures of abusive practices are those practices which are grossly unfair or 
exploitative in nature but are not necessarily serious enough to rise up to the 
level of trafficking. These practices can be perpetrated by either a smuggler 
during transportation or an employer at a workplace; they include practices 
such as forbidding someone from leaving the travelling group during trans-
portation, or working in a hazardous environment without protective gear. 
Although somewhat subjective, the abusive practices measured in this study 
also included practices that were clearly fraudulent and deceptive, definitional 
elements present in all international and United States legal frameworks. The 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   46 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 47

authors opted to exclude fraudulent and deceptive practices from the cate-
gory of trafficking violations because they wanted to obtain a set of “clean” 
measures by focusing on “force” and “coercion”. Examples of such fraudu-
lent practices include promising to pay migrants for a certain job and then 
abandoning them at the workplace after the work was completed or instruct-
ing them to lie about their employer’s identity or their own identity at the 
workplace. The items on abusive practices during transportation are items 010, 
030-060 and 080; and the items on abusive practices at the workplace are 
items 280-390.

Although far from perfect, these measures represent the first attempt in the 
United States research community to produce a standard instrument for pri-
mary data collection in labour trafficking research. For future data collection 
or analysis, researchers may consider different ways to configure these catego-
ries of measures and decide how to count different violations. For instance, an 
even stricter or narrower definition may be adopted to count only direct and 
actual violations of physical integrity or freedom of movement; or a wider 
definition may be used to include elements of fraud and deception. Many 
more studies are needed to replicate and improve these measures so that uni-
form data and comparable estimates can be produced to guide policymaking 
and resource allocation in anti-trafficking campaigns. 

It should be noted that because the data-gathering procedure was self-
report (i.e. face-to-face interview) in this study, the authors relied on the 
subjective evaluation of the participants’ own experiences. Because of con-
cerns for human subject protection, the authors made no attempt to verify 
the participants’ stories among their peers and relatives or to interview their 
employers or smugglers. Furthermore, a single incident of violation or abuse 
would qualify for victimization. The authors used this counting method 
because in no other research on crime is repeated exposure required to 
define victimization. 

Vetting, pilot testing and instrument refinement

The questionnaire used in the San Diego labour trafficking study underwent 
a rigorous vetting process in its development phase. During its initial develop-
ment, the instrument was reviewed by the main legal office at the United 
States Department of Justice, which provided comments and suggested a 
closer alignment with the trafficking legislation in the United States and the 
operational indicators contained in the public announcement pamphlets 
issued by the federal agencies. Two federal agencies, the Department of State 
and the Department of Health and Human Services, publish pamphlets 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   47 25/06/2015   11:16:53



48 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

containing operational indicators on human trafficking.* These pamphlets are 
intended to raise awareness among immigrants and foreign nationals of their 
basic human rights and forewarn them on various rights violation situations. 
Based on the pamphlets and comments of the legal office of the United States 
Department of Justice, the research team revised and expanded the question-
naire to include measures of scholarly interests, as well as practitioner- 
relevant indicators contained in the government documents. The revised 
version was again submitted to the United States Department of Justice for 
review. No further suggestions were made.

Following the face-validity phase, the questionnaire went through two addi-
tional stages of refinement. First, after the questionnaire was translated into 
Spanish, the project’s community partner agency, the San Diego Center for 
Social Advocacy, reviewed the questionnaire and compared it with the Eng-
lish version to detect any deviations in the intended meanings. The Spanish 
translation was adapted for use with Mexican migrants, which included cul-
turally and linguistically sensitive probes for the respondents’ idiomatic 
expressions of labour and travel experiences. The Spanish version was also 
back-translated into English to ensure fidelity. An item-by-item review of the 
translation was made by the bilingual project staff, paying special attention to 
cultural and linguistic adaptations appropriate for the subject population. 
Following the translation, mock interviews were conducted in Spanish to test 
the length and flow of the questions. Adjustments and rewording were made 
based on those efforts.

Second, two focus groups were conducted with six unauthorized migrant 
labourers recruited from the project area using the instrument. The focus 
groups were immediately followed by a debriefing in which the migrant 
labourers were asked to comment on the structure, flow and wording of the 
questions. Further refinements were made before the instrument was put to 
use in the field. 

Empirical test of the instrument

Using this instrument, a total of 826 subjects were interviewed. It was found 
that 30 per cent of the undocumented migrant labourer were victims of labour 
trafficking, 55 per cent were victims of other labour abuses and about half of 

* The State Department pamphlet can be found at: http://www.travel.state.gov/pdf/Pamphlet-
Order.pdf; and the brochure from Department of Health and Human Services is available at:  
www.acf.hhs.gov/trafficking/campaign_kits/tool_kit_social/social_service_brochure.pdf.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   48 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 49

these victimization experiences occurred within the past 12 months. The rate 
of trafficking violations varied markedly across business sectors that typically 
hire unauthorized migrant workers. Construction and janitorial services had 
the most reported trafficking violations and labour abuses. The findings in 
this study also suggest that it is likely that the illegal status in the country is 
the most significant factor contributing to vulnerability to trafficking viola-
tions. More details of the findings can be found in the final report of the study 
[34]. Using as a basis the estimate of the undocumented Mexican migrant 
population in San Diego County, the study found that there were roughly 
38,000 undocumented migrant labourers who had experiences that could 
meet the definition of labour trafficking used in the instrument. This number 
does not include those whose experiences only involved abuses or exploita-
tions that do not meet the definition of human trafficking. 

Since there are no national-level respondent-driven sampling data on labour 
trafficking topics, both the victimization rate and national estimates of labour 
trafficking victims are impossible to derive. However, if the San Diego labour 
trafficking rate were to be applied to the national scale, the number of traffick-
ing victims would be staggering. Even if the narrowest definition of human 
trafficking is adopted (i.e. counting only direct and actual violations to physi-
cal integrity), the number of trafficking victims would still be large enough to 
warrant serious policy debate. This is because the population base of undocu-
mented immigrants in the United States is so large. Any small percentage, 
once applied to such a large population, will produce many victims. Obvi-
ously these findings require additional empirical verification because of their 
serious implications for policymaking and law enforcement initiatives. 

Classical discriminant properties of the San Diego instrument

Aside from the significance of the prevalence estimates, more importantly the 
integrity and structure of the measurement instrument was also tested in this 
study. The San Diego instrument was found to possess excellent discriminant 
properties. A visual presentation of the instrument’s discriminant properties 
is included in the figure below, which shows the clusters of measures and their 
frequencies relative to their perceived severity. By convention, the severity of 
a crime is generally inversely related to the frequency of its occurrence. In 
other words, homicide is a less frequent crime than robbery, which in turn is 
a less frequent crime than burglary. An instrument attempting to capture 
criminal activities ought to be able to differentiate between the more serious 
crimes and the less serious ones. As shown in the figure, the instrument was 
clearly able to differentiate the more serious labour trafficking offences (e.g. 
violations of physical integrity) from the less serious ones (e.g. abusive labour 
practices).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   49 25/06/2015   11:16:53



50 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Figure I. Severity of violations/abuses and frequency of occurrence

(Percentage)

Psychometric analysis

The ability to distinguish more serious offences from less serious ones is not 
enough for the validation of the instrument. The authors performed addi-
tional tests to examine the psychometric properties of the specifi c items. Their 
analytical strategies follow many of the established procedures. At the core of 
their analytic approach is a novel application of item response theory (IRT) 
and related item factor-analytic methods for instrument development and 
psychometric evaluation. IRT is a state-of-the-art method that has supported 
most, if not all, contemporary large-scale educational assessments (for an 
introduction to IRT, see Yen and Fitzpatrick [38]). Researchers are also 
increasingly becoming aware of the potential benefi ts of IRT methodology in 
health-related outcomes research [39] and in mental health assessment [40]. 
One of the most recent large-scale applications of IRT in behavioural meas-
urement is the Patient-Reported Outcomes Measurement Information Sys-
tem (PROMIS) initiative [41] of the National Institutes of Health. The 
application of IRT to measurement research in criminal justice is relatively 
new, with only few examples [42]. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   50 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 51

IRT offers distinct practical advantages over traditional classical test theory-
based methods such as Cronbach’s alpha [43-45]. The benefits of IRT include 
but are not limited to a “built-in” mechanism to align scores from different 
forms of measurement onto the same scale, create or maintain item banks 
with known characteristics to facilitate the assembly of tests (sometimes in a 
hurry, as in computerized adaptive testing) tailored to specific purposes or 
individuals, and to detect potential differential item functioning across groups 
of individuals or over time to disentangle group differences from measure-
ment artefacts. Recent technical developments [46-49] also made possible 
the routine application of multidimensional IRT for more realistically com-
plex measurement models (e.g. longitudinal situations) and enhanced preci-
sion of the resulting scaled scores. 

The basic building block of parametric IRT is the item characteristic curve 
(also known as the traceline) that is defined by item parameters such as sever-
ity and discrimination. The item parameters place an item on the same scale 
as the latent construct that is being measured (e.g. violations of physical 
integrity or restriction of physical freedom). This is an essential feature of 
IRT-based measurement, in contrast with classical measurement methods. 
Instead of reporting a single reliability coefficient for an entire scale (e.g. 
Cronbach’s alpha), IRT models characterize the reliability of a measurement 
instrument as a function of the level of the underlying latent construct that is 
being measured. This feature of IRT can be used to identify the best item to 
administer for a given level of a latent variable. By using the most informative 
items for a given individual or a given purpose, short and tailored instruments 
(e.g. computerized adaptive testing) with many fewer items can be just as reli-
able as longer but static assessments. In sum, IRT promises significantly 
reduced respondent burden, potentially increased fidelity and a robust frame-
work for further measurement development. These are welcome features for 
research and evaluation in the area of criminal justice. To establish the psy-
chometric properties of the San Diego labour trafficking core measures, sev-
eral steps of IRT analysis were carried out. 

Initial classical item analysis. First, basic item-level descriptive statistics were 
generated. The 39 items were dichotomously scored (endorsement of the 
statement vs. not). The item responses were examined for potentially unen-
dorsed categories and the proportions in each response category for highly 
skewed univariate distributions that might cause problems for subsequent 
analysis. Next, after appropriate recoding so that the responses were along the 
same direction for all items, the authors plotted, for each item, the summed-
score by response category table to examine the empirical category response 
functions for gross departures from the presumed order of the category 
response characteristics. The task for this analytic phase was to screen for 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   51 25/06/2015   11:16:53



52 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

unusual items that have to be dropped from further IRT analysis. At this level 
of analysis, all 39 items were found to have performed well and thus returned 
for the next step of validation. 

Exploratory and confirmatory item factor analysis. Having retained all 39 items 
from the last step, item factor analyses (also known as multidimensional IRT 
analysis) were then conducted with Reckase’s [50] multidimensional exten-
sion of the 2-parameter IRT model. The purposes of this step were: (a) to 
examine the number of dimensions as well as the factor structure underlying 
the items; and (b) to identify problematic items for deletion, such as items that 
loaded poorly on all dimensions. The authors employed the full- information 
item factor analysis approach using a maximum marginal likelihood estima-
tor with the raw item response data [51]. They used IRTPRO software for 
full-information item factor analysis estimation. 

IRT calibration and model fit diagnostics. Next, the entire sample was subjected to 
the calibration run. A variety of model fit diagnostics were used to identify 
sources of potential misfit to settle on a final model [52]. IRTPRO software was 
used because of its flexibility and its ability to test competing unidimensional 
and multidimensional models. The item parameters obtained from the calibra-
tion run with an item bi-factor model are shown in the table on page 54 [49].

IRT diagnostic results. As shown in the table, the factor structure exhibits the 
classical item bi-factor pattern, widely recognized as a valuable model for 
measurement research [53], with the first/general dimension capturing the 
variation in the primary labour trafficking latent variable and the subsequent 
dimensions representing additional/residual dependence due to context or 
content. The San Diego labour trafficking instrument performed well with all 
items achieving strong primary dimension item discrimination parameters 
(see α1 slopes, which are analogous to factor loadings, and associated stand-
ard error). At a reasonably large sample size (N=826) for IRT parameter 
estimation, the primary discrimination parameters were statistically signifi-
cantly different from zero, indicating each item contributes significantly to 
the measurement of the underlying labour trafficking dimension. The item 
location (c) parameters are real numbers negatively associated with the sever-
ity of the item. Thus a more severe item will tend to have a smaller c value and 
vice versa. The varying location parameters provide relatively wide coverage 
of the underlying labour trafficking dimension, despite the intent of the 
instrument being primarily for screening.

More importantly, the bi-factor structure showed excellent discriminating 
properties, by clearly differentiating subscale items on trafficking violations 
during transportation (items 1-8, see α2 factor loadings and associated 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   52 25/06/2015   11:16:53



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 53

standard error) and violations involving physical elements (i.e. violence) at 
the workplace (items 9-20, see α3 factor loadings and associated standard 
error). Three additional pairs of items (items 28 and 35—deceptions regard-
ing work/pay conditions; items 32 and 33 —fraudulent representations; and 
items 36 and 37—wage theft) were found to exhibit extra residual depend-
ence and hence additional item-doublet dimensions were included in the bi-
factor model to appropriately handle the dependence. 

To test the statistical model fit, the authors also fitted a unidimensional (i.e. 
single-factor) 2-parameter IRT model to the data set. This model is formally 
nested within the bi-factor model and hence a likelihood ratio test can be 
conducted to compare the degree of model fit. The unidimensional model has 
78 parameters (one pair of α and c parameters for each of the 39 items). The 
-2 x log-likelihood value is 12430. The bi-factor model has 101 parameters 
and the corresponding -2 x log-likelihood value is 11971. Standard likelihood 
theory suggests that the difference in -2 x log-likelihoods is distributed as a 
central chi-square variable with 101 – 78 = 23 degrees of freedom under the 
null hypothesis that the two models provide the same fit. Of course, the 
obtained chi-square value of 459 is highly significant on 23 degrees of free-
dom, indicating that the bi-factor model fits substantially better than the uni-
dimensional model. All other model fit diagnostics (e.g. the local dependence 
indices of [52] point to the bi-factor model as the preferred model choice). 
Furthermore, the M2 statistic [54] and the corresponding root mean square 
error of approximation (RMSEA) index provide an overall statement of 
model fit. The obtained M2 is 948 on 679 degrees of freedom, and the associ-
ated RMSEA is equal to 0.02, well below the usual threshold of 0.05, indicat-
ing excellent model fit.

The authors believe that the San Diego instrument is, at a minimum, valid for 
detecting a broad spectrum of labour trafficking violations and abuses, though 
further instrument refinement by adding or subtracting items or revising cer-
tain items will improve its sensitivity to measurement dimensions.

Discussion

While much more can and should be done to further test and validate the 
San Diego labour trafficking instrument, the authors believe the instrument 
has established several major criteria that ought to be followed, as well as 
scrutinized, in all future efforts in developing human trafficking measures. 
First, if labour trafficking is to be defined as a social problem, then there 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   53 25/06/2015   11:16:53



54 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Table 1. Psychometric properties of the San Diego labour trafficking instrument

Item Label a1

Standard 
error a2

Standard 
error a3

Standard 
error a4

Standard 
error a5

Standard 
error a6

Standard 
error c

Standard 
error

1 f_travel 2 1.37 0.28   3 2.12 0.44  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----   1 -3.96 0.54

2 w_id 5 1.21 0.39   6 1.6 0.5  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----   4 -5.7 0.78

3 f_family 8 2.06 0.5   9 3.07 0.85  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----   7 -5.15 1.12

4 f_other 11 1.42 0.34 12 1.71 0.53  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 10 -4.53 0.57

5 Assult 14 1.4 0.3 15 1.57 0.4  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 13 -4.7 0.55

6 Threaten 17 1.59 0.3 18 1.92 0.42  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 16 -4.54 0.57

7 hostage 20 0.82 0.25 21 1.69 0.4  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 19 -4.34 0.51

8 pay_smug 23 0.92 0.19 24 1.32 0.27  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 22 -3.09 0.3

9 p_abuse 26 1.22 0.29  0 ----- 27 1.05 0.37  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 25 -4.25 0.43

10 s_abuse 29 1.09 0.43  0 ----- 30 0.7 0.57  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 28 -5.15 0.58

11 threat_p 32 1.98 0.37  0 ----- 33 0.93 0.41  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 31 -5.33 0.56

12 threat_s 35 1.44 0.28  0 ----- 36 0.42 0.36  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 34 -4.18 0.36

13 lock 38 3.28 0.49  0 ----- 39 0.12 0.49  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 37 -7.52 0.92

14 harm 41 2.99 0.42  0 ----- 42 1.95 0.6  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 40 -8.63 1.08

15 threat_fam 44 3.08 0.82  0 ----- 45 2.48 0.72  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 43 -10.1 1.36

16 threat_deport 47 2.35 0.65  0 ----- 48 2.23 0.46  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 46 -5.34 0.71

17 threat_arrest 50 3.62 0.94  0 ----- 51 3.28 0.64  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 49 -9.9 1.14

18 threat_polic 53 2.08 0.45  0 ----- 54 2.26 0.68  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 52 -4.53 0.81

19 harm_phy 56 1.65 0.81  0 ----- 57 1.98 1.33  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 55 -7.44 3.03

20 anymanner 59 2.68 0.8  0 ----- 60 1.6 0.44  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 58 -6.49 1.13

21 forb_leave 62 2 0.27  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 61 -3.46 0.33

22 restrict 64 2.28 0.55  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 63 -5.56 0.93

23 takeID 66 1.68 0.75  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 65 -6.14 2.01

24 nofood 68 2.61 0.31  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 67 -2.58 0.28

25 forb_family 70 3.84 1.9  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 69 -7.75 3.08

26 forb_cowork 72 2.88 0.61  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 71 -5.65 0.88

27 forb_outside 74 2.63 0.56  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 73 -5.83 0.89

28 conditions 76 2.99 1.74  0 -----  0 ----- 92 1.94 2.17  0 -----  0 ----- 75 -2.44 1.39

29 nofam_permi 78 3.89 0.77  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 77 -7.91 1.29

30 nogo_permi 80 2.07 0.32  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 79 -4.19 0.44

31 seekhelp 82 1.88 0.25  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 81 -3.3 0.28

32 lie_urself 84 2.66 0.46  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 87 2.58 0.52 83 -7.05 0.52

33 lie_employer 86 2.65 0.54  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 87 2.58 0.52 85 -7.79 0.55

34 deny_pay 89 2.78 0.34  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 88 -1.65 0.21

35 less_pay 91 2.72 1.59  0 -----  0 ----- 92 1.94 2.17  0 -----  0 ----- 90 -2.2 1.18

36 badcheck 94 1.23 0.21  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 97 1.65 0.37  0 ----- 93 -3.07 0.2

37 disappear 96 2.02 0.29  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 97 1.65 0.37  0 ----- 95 -3.74 0.27

38 haza_envion 99 1.92 0.24  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 98 -2.24 0.25

39 other_exp 101 1.35 0.23  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 100 -2.14 0.23

Notes: The column headings a1, a2, a3 ... refer to factor loadings.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   54 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 55

Table 1. Psychometric properties of the San Diego labour trafficking instrument

Item Label a1

Standard 
error a2

Standard 
error a3

Standard 
error a4

Standard 
error a5

Standard 
error a6

Standard 
error c

Standard 
error

1 f_travel 2 1.37 0.28   3 2.12 0.44  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----   1 -3.96 0.54

2 w_id 5 1.21 0.39   6 1.6 0.5  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----   4 -5.7 0.78

3 f_family 8 2.06 0.5   9 3.07 0.85  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----   7 -5.15 1.12

4 f_other 11 1.42 0.34 12 1.71 0.53  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 10 -4.53 0.57

5 Assult 14 1.4 0.3 15 1.57 0.4  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 13 -4.7 0.55

6 Threaten 17 1.59 0.3 18 1.92 0.42  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 16 -4.54 0.57

7 hostage 20 0.82 0.25 21 1.69 0.4  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 19 -4.34 0.51

8 pay_smug 23 0.92 0.19 24 1.32 0.27  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 22 -3.09 0.3

9 p_abuse 26 1.22 0.29  0 ----- 27 1.05 0.37  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 25 -4.25 0.43

10 s_abuse 29 1.09 0.43  0 ----- 30 0.7 0.57  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 28 -5.15 0.58

11 threat_p 32 1.98 0.37  0 ----- 33 0.93 0.41  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 31 -5.33 0.56

12 threat_s 35 1.44 0.28  0 ----- 36 0.42 0.36  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 34 -4.18 0.36

13 lock 38 3.28 0.49  0 ----- 39 0.12 0.49  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 37 -7.52 0.92

14 harm 41 2.99 0.42  0 ----- 42 1.95 0.6  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 40 -8.63 1.08

15 threat_fam 44 3.08 0.82  0 ----- 45 2.48 0.72  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 43 -10.1 1.36

16 threat_deport 47 2.35 0.65  0 ----- 48 2.23 0.46  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 46 -5.34 0.71

17 threat_arrest 50 3.62 0.94  0 ----- 51 3.28 0.64  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 49 -9.9 1.14

18 threat_polic 53 2.08 0.45  0 ----- 54 2.26 0.68  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 52 -4.53 0.81

19 harm_phy 56 1.65 0.81  0 ----- 57 1.98 1.33  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 55 -7.44 3.03

20 anymanner 59 2.68 0.8  0 ----- 60 1.6 0.44  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 58 -6.49 1.13

21 forb_leave 62 2 0.27  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 61 -3.46 0.33

22 restrict 64 2.28 0.55  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 63 -5.56 0.93

23 takeID 66 1.68 0.75  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 65 -6.14 2.01

24 nofood 68 2.61 0.31  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 67 -2.58 0.28

25 forb_family 70 3.84 1.9  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 69 -7.75 3.08

26 forb_cowork 72 2.88 0.61  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 71 -5.65 0.88

27 forb_outside 74 2.63 0.56  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 73 -5.83 0.89

28 conditions 76 2.99 1.74  0 -----  0 ----- 92 1.94 2.17  0 -----  0 ----- 75 -2.44 1.39

29 nofam_permi 78 3.89 0.77  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 77 -7.91 1.29

30 nogo_permi 80 2.07 0.32  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 79 -4.19 0.44

31 seekhelp 82 1.88 0.25  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 81 -3.3 0.28

32 lie_urself 84 2.66 0.46  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 87 2.58 0.52 83 -7.05 0.52

33 lie_employer 86 2.65 0.54  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 87 2.58 0.52 85 -7.79 0.55

34 deny_pay 89 2.78 0.34  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 88 -1.65 0.21

35 less_pay 91 2.72 1.59  0 -----  0 ----- 92 1.94 2.17  0 -----  0 ----- 90 -2.2 1.18

36 badcheck 94 1.23 0.21  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 97 1.65 0.37  0 ----- 93 -3.07 0.2

37 disappear 96 2.02 0.29  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 97 1.65 0.37  0 ----- 95 -3.74 0.27

38 haza_envion 99 1.92 0.24  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 98 -2.24 0.25

39 other_exp 101 1.35 0.23  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 -----  0 ----- 100 -2.14 0.23

Notes: The column headings a1, a2, a3 ... refer to factor loadings.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   55 25/06/2015   11:16:54



56 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

must be shared experiences (as opposed to unique individual encounters) 
with common characteristics to allow for the development of common 
measures. The development of different construct dimensions (e.g. viola-
tion of physical integrity, restriction of freedom of movement or deceptive 
employment tactics) thus becomes important, as they serve as guideposts 
for instrumentation purposes. 

Second, while acknowledging the differences across countries or regions 
or economic sectors, there need to be consistent items to closely reflect all 
international legal frameworks, and the research community must agree to 
adhere to those items. Consistent wording in the construction of such 
common measures will facilitate cross-national comparison and enable 
informed policy discourse on the direction of and investment in anti- 
trafficking programmes. 

Third, following the model widely adopted in psychology and education, the 
trafficking research community needs to engage in deliberate and thoughtful 
efforts to construct a common core of measures and to field test and validate 
them in multiple settings. All steps of validation and test results need to be 
fully disclosed to allow others to confirm and modify them for their own 
research purposes. Finally, a test bank or something to that effect needs to be 
established, perhaps under the auspices of UNODC, to host various exam-
ples of trafficking instruments, together with their supporting documents and 
validation studies, so that others do not have to reinvent the wheel every time 
they want to gather data on human trafficking. The lack of consistent meas-
urement of labour trafficking is hampering empirical research and policy dis-
course. A valid and reliable instrument is a major building block of empirical 
methods to obtain valid and reliable data that are badly needed to support 
anti-trafficking initiatives ([55], p. 2). 

The San Diego instrument was constructed to align with the United States 
Government’s interpretation of labour trafficking, and it has a flexible struc-
ture that permits different configurations to build a severity index. The core 
measures of this instrument have also been successfully field-tested in North 
Carolina in a separate study with a sample of 380 migrant farmworkers 
[56]. Currently another state-wide survey using multi-stage probability 
sampling strategy is under way in North Carolina; the San Diego labour 
trafficking instrument will be adapted for use in this new study. As more 
examples of trafficking measurement are made available by researchers or 
agencies that have conducted empirical studies, it will be possible to move 
steadily towards greater precision in the estimation of the scope of the traf-
ficking programme.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   56 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 57

References

 1. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Global Report on Trafficking in 
 Persons (2009). 

 2. International Labour Organization, A Global Alliance against Forced Labour: 
Global Report under the Follow-up to the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and 
Rights at Work (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2005). 

 3. International Labour Organization, “Technical consultation on forced labour 
indicators, data collection and national estimates: summary report” (Geneva, Inter-
national Labour Office, 2006). 

 4. Frank Laczko and David Thompson, eds., Migrant Trafficking and Human Smug-
gling in Europe: A Review of the Evidence with Case Studies from Hungary, Poland and 
Ukraine (Geneva, International Organization for Migration, 2000). 

 5. United States of America, Department of State, Office of the Under Secretary 
for Democracy and Global Affairs and Bureau of Public Affairs, Trafficking in Persons 
Report: June 2008, publication 11407 (Washington, D.C., 2008): United States 
Department of State. 

 6. Kevin Bales, Disposable People: New Slavery in the Global Economy, 2nd ed. 
(Berkeley, California, University of California Press, 2004). 

 7. Patrick Belser, Michaëlle de Cock and Farhad Mehran, “ILO minimum esti-
mate of forced labour in the world” (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2005). 

 8. International Labour Organization, ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour 2012: 
Results and Methodology (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2012). 

 9. Elzbieta M. Gozdziak and Micah. N. Bump, Data and Research on Human Traf-
ficking: Bibliography of Research-based Literature (Washington, D.C., Institute for the 
Study of International Migration, Georgetown University, 2008)

10. Amy Farrell and others, Review of Existing Estimates of Victims of Human Traffick-
ing in the United States and Recommendations for Improving Research and Measurement of 
Human Trafficking (Washington, D.C., Humanity United, 2009). 

11. T. K. Logan, Robert Walker and Gretchen Hunt, “Understanding human  
trafficking in the United States”, Trauma, Violence and Abuse, vol. 10, No. 1 (2009), 
pp. 3-30.

12. Jeffery Barrows and Reginald Finger, “Human trafficking and the healthcare 
professional”, Southern Medical Journal, vol. 101, No. 5 (2008), pp. 521-524. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   57 25/06/2015   11:16:54



58 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

13. David A. Feingold, “Think again: human trafficking”, Foreign Policy Issue, 
vol. 150 (2005), pp. 26-32.

14. Patrick Belser, “Forced labour and human trafficking: estimating the profits”, 
Working Paper, No. 42 (Geneva, International Labour Office, March 2005). 

15. United States, Department of Justice, Assessment of U.S. Government Efforts to 
Combat Trafficking in Persons in Fiscal Year 2006 (Washington, D. C., 2007). 

16. Bruce Kutnick, Patrick Belser and Gergana Danailova-Trainor, “Methodologies 
for global and national estimation of human trafficking victims: current and future 
approaches”, Working Paper, No. 29 (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2007). 

17. Guri Tyldum and Anette Brunovskis, “Describing the unobserved: methodo-
logical challenges in empirical studies on human trafficking”, in Data and Research on 
Human Trafficking: A Global Survey — Offprint of the Special Issue of International 
Migration Vol. 43 (1/2) 2005, Frank Laczko and Elzbieta Gozdziak, eds. (Geneva, 
International Organization for Migration, 2005), pp. 17-34.

18. Elzbieta M. Gozdziak and Elizabeth A. Collett, “Research on human trafficking 
in North America: a review of literature” in Data and Research on Human Trafficking: 
A Global Survey — Offprint of the Special Issue of International Migration Vol. 43 (1/2) 
2005, Frank Laczko and Elzbieta Gozdziak, eds. (Geneva, International Organization 
for Migration, 2005), pp. 99-128. 

19. Frank Laczko and Elzbieta Gozdziak, eds., Data and Research on Human Traf-
ficking: A Global Survey — Offprint of the Special Issue of International Migration Vol. 43 
(1/2) 2005 (Geneva, International Organization for Migration, 2005). 

20. Frank Laczko and Marco A. Gramegna, “Developing better indicators of human 
trafficking”, Brown Journal of World Affairs, vol. X, No. 1 (Summer/Fall 2003), 
pp. 179-194.

21. Michaëlle de Cock, Directions for National and International Data Collection on 
Forced Labour, Working Paper, No. 30 (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2007). 

22. Amy Farrell, Jack McDevitt and Stephanie Fahy, Understanding and Improving 
Law Enforcement Responses to Human Trafficking: Final Report (Boston, Massachusetts, 
Institute on Race and Justice, Northeastern University, 2008). 

23. Ernesto U. Savona and Sonia Stefanizzi, eds., Measuring Human Trafficking: 
Complexities and Pitfalls (New York, Springer, 2007). 

24. United States, Department of Justice, Assessment of U.S. Government Efforts to 
Combat Trafficking in Persons in Fiscal Year 2005 (Washington, D. C., 2006). 

25. United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   58 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 59

26. United States, Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (28 
October 2000), sect. 103. 

27. International Labour Organization, Hard to See, Harder to Count: Survey Guide-
lines to Estimate Forced Labour of Adults and Children (Geneva, International Labour 
Office, 2011).

28. Amy Farrell, Jack McDevitt and Stephanie Fahy, “Where are all the victims? 
Understanding the determinants of official identification of human trafficking inci-
dents”, Criminology and Public Policy, vol. 9, No. 2 (2010), pp. 201-233.

29. Kevin Bales, Ending Slavery: How We Free Today’s Slaves (Berkeley, California, 
University of California Press, 2007). 

30. Kevin Bales and Roon Soodalter, The Slave Next Door: Human Trafficking and 
Slavery in America Today (Berkeley, California, University of California Press, 2009). 

31. Kara Siddharth, “Supply and demand: human trafficking in the global econ-
omy”, Harvard International Review, vol. 33, No. 2 (2011), pp. 66-71.

32. International Centre for Migration Policy Development, Handbook on Anti‐ 
Trafficking Data Collection in South‐Eastern Europe: Developing Regional Criteria 
(Vienna, 2010). 

33. International Labour Organization, “Operational indicators of trafficking in 
human beings” (Geneva, 2009). Available at www.ilo.org/.

34. Sheldon X. Zhang, “Measuring labor trafficking: a research note”, Crime, Law 
and Social Change, vol. 58, No. 4 (2012), pp. 469-482.

35. Josine Junger-Tas, Gert-Jan Terlouw and Malcolm W. Klein, eds., Delinquent 
Behavior among Young People in the Western World: First Results of the International Self-
Report Delinquency Study, Studies on Crime and Justice (Amsterdam, Kluwer Publica-
tions, 1994).

36. Josine Junger-Tas and others, eds., Juvenile Delinquency in Europe and Beyond: 
Results of the Second International Self-Report Delinquency Study (New York, Springer 
Science and Business Media, 2010). 

37. Josine Junger-Tas, “The significance of the international self-report delinquency 
study (ISRD)”, European Journal on Criminal Policy and Research, vol. 16, No. 2 
(2010), pp. 71-87.

38. Wendy M. Yen and Anne R. Fitzpatrick, “Item response theory”, in Educational 
Measurement, Robert L. Brennan, eds., 4th ed. (Westport, Connecticut, Praeger Pub-
lishers, 2006), pp. 111-153. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   59 25/06/2015   11:16:54



60 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

39. Maria O. Edelen and Bryce B. Reeve, “Applying item response theory (IRT) 
modeling to questionnaire development, evaluation, and refinement”, Quality of Life 
Research, vol. 16, No. 1, Supplement (2007), pp. 5-18. 

40. Robert D. Gibbons and others, “Using computerized adaptive testing to reduce 
the burden of mental health assessment”, Psychiatric Services, Vol. 59, No. 4 (2008), 
pp. 361-368. 

41. David Cella and others, “The patient-reported outcomes measurement infor-
mation system (PROMISE): progress of an NIH roadmap cooperative group during 
its first two years”, Med Care, vol. 45, No. 5, (2007), pp. 3-11. 

42. Wayne Osgood, Barbara J. McMorris and Maria T. Potenza, “Analyzing multiple- 
item measures of crime and deviance I: item response theory scaling”, Journal of 
Quantitative Criminology, vol. 18, No. 3 (2002), pp. 267-296.

43. Susan E. Embretson, “The new rules of measurement”, Psychological Assessment, 
vol. 8, No. 4 (1996), pp. 341-349. 

44. Susan E. Embretson and Steve P. Reise, Item Response Theory for Psychologists, 
Multivariate Applications Series (Mahwah, New Jersey, Lawrence Earlbaum Associ-
ates, 2000). 

45. David Thissen and Lynne Steinberg, “Item response theory”, in The SAGE Hand-
book of Quantitative Methods in Psychology, Roger E. Millsap and Alberto  Maydeu-Olivares, 
eds. (London, Sage Publications, 2009), pp. 148-177.

46. Li Cai, “High-dimensional exploratory item factor analysis by a Metropolis-
Hastings Robbins-Monro algorithm”, Psychometrika, vol. 75, No. 1 (2010), pp. 33-57.

47. Li Cai, “Metropolis-Hastings Robbins-Monro algorithm for confirmatory item 
factor analysis”, Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, vol. 35, No. 3 (2010), 
pp. 307-335. 

48. Li Cai, “A two-tier full-information item factor analysis model with applica-
tions”, Psychometrika, vol. 75, No. 4 (2010), pp. 581-612.

49. Li Cai, Ji Seung Yang and Mark Hansen, “Generalized full-information item 
bifactor analysis”, Psychological Methods, vol. 16, No. 3 (2011), pp. 221-248.

50. Mark D. Reckase, Multidimensional Item Response Theory, Statistics for Social 
and Behavioral Sciences Series (Springer, New York, 2009). 

51. R. D. Bock, R. Gibbons and E. Muraki, “Full-information item factor analysis”, 
Applied Psychological Measurement, vol. 12, No. 3 (1988), pp. 261-280. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   60 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Counting labour trafficking activities: an empirical attempt at standardized measurement 61

52. Wen H. Chen and D. Thissen, “Local dependence indices for item pairs using 
item response theory”, Journal of Educational and Behavioral Statistics, vol. 22, No. 3 
(1997), pp. 265-289. 

53. Steven P. Reise, “Invited paper: the rediscovery of bifactor measurement  models”, 
Multivariate Behavioral Research, vol. 47, No. 5 (2012), pp. 667-696. 

54. A. Maydeu-Olivares and H. Joe, “Limited- and full-information estimation and 
goodness-of-fit testing in 2n contingency tables: a united framework”, Journal of the 
American Statistical Association, vol. 100, No. 471 (2005), pp. 1009-1020. 

55. H. J. Clawson, M. Layne and K. Small, Estimating Human Trafficking into the 
United States: Development of a Methodology, document No. 215475 (Fairfax, Virginia, 
Caliber, 2006). 

56. Kelle Barrick and others, “When farmworkers and advocates see trafficking but 
law enforcement does not: challenges in identifying labor trafficking in North  Carolina”, 
Crime, Law and Social Change, vol. 61, No. 2 (2014), pp. 205-214.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   61 25/06/2015   11:16:54



15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   62 25/06/2015   11:16:54



63

CALCULATIONS VERSUS COUNTING OF HUMAN 
TRAFFICKING NUMBERS

By Thomas M. Steinfatt*

Abstract

Thomas M. Steinfatt argues in his article in favour of counting the actual 
number of human trafficking cases as an alternative to estimating the size and 
range of human trafficking through statistical projections. With his research 
on sex workers in Cambodia he shows how data on victims of trafficking for 
the purpose of sexual exploitation can be obtained by analysing communica-
tion methods used in the sex industry, locating the actual premises and 
directly observing the criminal activity in progress.

Keywords: counting numbers, trafficking in persons, sex work, Cambodia

Introduction

The author currently serves as an adviser on human trafficking to two  
non-governmental organizations, one in Australia and the other in the United 
States of America, and he works with the United Nations Inter-Agency Pro-
ject on Human Trafficking and the United Nations Office on Drugs and 
Crime (UNODC). His interest in human trafficking came about through a 
1988 meeting with Werasit Sittitrai, who was with the Thai Red Cross Society. 
His suggestion to study factors affecting condom use probabilities among 
foreigner-oriented Thai sex workers led to him being one of two United States 
scholars invited to conduct such a study, with the support of the Chulabhorn 
Research Institute. Under the patronage of Princess Chulabhorn of Thailand, 
it provided travel support for the international congress on AIDS in develop-
ing nations, held in Bangkok in 1990. Data gathering for this study continued 
throughout the1990s, resulting in the publication of Working at the Bar: Sex 
Work and Health Communication in Thailand [1]. 

Information from some of the workers interviewed included situations of 
potential human trafficking outside of Thailand, leading to initial data collec-
tion on human trafficking in Cambodia in 1996. An initial study of potential 

* University of Miami, Florida, United States of America.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   63 25/06/2015   11:16:54



64 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

sex trafficking in Phnom Penh was completed in 2002 and presented to a 
conference sponsored by the United States Department of State [2]. This was 
followed by data collection throughout Cambodia in 2002, which was funded 
and, in 2003, published by the State Department.

The United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human Trafficking sponsored a 
competition beginning in 2006 on the Best Methods of Studying Human 
Trafficking. Entries by the author, the School of Public Health of Johns  Hopkins 
University and a Vietnamese non-governmental organization received the  
top awards. The funding from this award made it possible for data on sex traf-
ficking to be collected on a large scale throughout Cambodia in 2008 and 
published in 2011 by the United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human 
Trafficking as Measuring the Extent of Sex Trafficking in Cambodia: 2008 [3], 
which is discussed in more detail below. 

Trafficking in persons occurs in every country. It is based on the economics 
of greed, on the desire to profit from the work of others without providing just 
compensation to the workers. Human trafficking may also involve various 
forms of deception and illegal behaviour in order to make this profit. One 
form of trafficking in persons is trafficking in women and children. The eco-
nomic activity involved in such trafficking is often sex work. Sex trafficking 
occurs when persons are induced to engage in sex work through force, fraud 
or coercion, or when the sex worker is under 18 years of age. Sex trafficking 
is often divided into: (a) trafficked workers who are over 18 and not paid (or 
are grossly underpaid); and (b) workers who are under 18 and who are traf-
ficked regardless of the level of payment. The presence of workers under 18 
increases profit and also may attract paedophiles. 

Theory and rationale

In what lines of work does human trafficking occur?

This article is mainly concerned with methodology—the procedures through 
which the data are obtained and analysed in coming to conclusions about 
trafficking. While the author’s work has concentrated on sex trafficking, labour 
trafficking involving men, especially in the fishing industry, and unpaid or 
underpaid domestic work, usually involving women, make up substantial por-
tions of the persons trafficked throughout the world. The women involved 
may be middle-aged or older women who live outside under the stairs of their 
employer’s house in a middle- or upper-class neighbourhood or sleep under a 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   64 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 65

tarpaulin near their employer’s car and who are often paid so little or so infre-
quently that they cannot afford to leave; and if they do attempt to leave, their 
prospects of succeeding are not good. Sex trafficking is not as common as 
these forms of trafficking, but it has become a focal point for action against all 
forms of human trafficking.

Why does human trafficking occur?

The motivation of traffickers is primarily monetary—obtaining money for the 
labour of those trafficked and either underpaying or simply not paying the 
workers. Sex work is a business. Its goal is to make money, and sex trafficking 
is a small but important portion of this business. Sex trafficking occurs in the 
context of the sex business. It is not a separate enterprise but a part of the 
business of sex work. The motivation for sex trafficking is commercial and 
monetary—to make money, not to enslave. Sex trafficking is not motivated by 
evil people who set out to do harm; it is motivated by greed. It occurs when 
people are not concerned about the harm they cause to others. It occurs when 
people are willing to allow or even sponsor the harming of others if a profit 
can be made from it. Sex traffickers are evil because they do not care about 
the harm and suffering they cause. The evil of human trafficking is incidental 
to the malicious behaviour of traffickers. It is a result, not a cause.

Observing and collecting data on the operation of sex work enterprises in 
Thailand in the 1990s and Cambodia in the decade that followed led to sev-
eral generalizations concerning the points at which sex work is most likely to 
be observed and the nature of the clientele at those points, as discussed in 
Steinfatt and Baker [3].

Where do sex work and sex trafficking occur?

Data gathered by the author indicate that sex work is not evenly distributed 
across geographical areas. It normally occurs only at or near geographical 
points: (a) where a sufficient population of males in the age group 16-60 
exists (permanently or sporadically) or travels past; (b) where there is a mini-
mum of limiting factors such as easy observability by neighbours and relatives; 
(c) where the males have sufficient disposable income to support sex work;  
(d) where the males have knowledge of the norms of sex work or are part of a 
network of men that includes some who have this knowledge; and (e) where 
sex work exists and at least some of the males know about its existence. 

While cities and larger population centres have brothels, not all villages have 
a sex work venue. The probability of a sex work venue existing increases both 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   65 25/06/2015   11:16:54



66 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

with the size of the population of the village and with the increasing distance 
to the nearest village with a sex work venue. Thus, sex work is far less likely to 
occur in rural areas that are not gathering places and is more likely to occur 
in or near more populated locations and along or near transportation routes 
where substantial numbers of people regularly pass in the course of their every-
day activity.

Assumptions and rationale for the methods used in  
the Cambodia studies

A commercial enterprise wishing to maximize profits must communicate its 
existence and location to potential customers. Once a customer encounters a 
specific brothel, its location is known to him and he will be able to inform 
friends who may not know of it. Such repeat customers and their friends pro-
vide only a small level of profits for the business. In order to achieve high 
profits, a larger customer base is needed. There must be a way—other than 
word of mouth—of informing potential customers of the existence, purpose 
and location of the business. Typical methods of communicating this infor-
mation for sex work businesses include developing personal contacts with 
local transportation and lodging workers who are likely to encounter poten-
tial customers.

Sex work businesses in Cambodia typically inform taxi drivers of the kickback 
they will receive if they bring new customers interested in their particular 
services to their enterprise. This amount usually varies between 5 and 20 per 
cent of the cost for sex, per customer, but it may be higher in certain cases. 
Taxi drivers in all parts of the world are aware of such kickbacks and are moti-
vated to know many sex work locations in their areas. This allows them to 
satisfy customers, receive tips and receive kickbacks from sex businesses. 
Newly arrived males often hint at or ask taxi drivers to take them to a place 
where sex is available. Thus, taxi drivers become an excellent source of infor-
mation concerning the location of sex work, both from satisfying customers 
and receiving payment from them and from satisfying sex businesses and 
receiving payment from them. Since sex trafficking occurs within sex work 
venues, all sex trafficking venues ought to be found within the set of sex work 
venues located within a given area.

It is sometimes claimed that there are “hidden brothels”—brothels that “can-
not be found” but contain trafficked women and children. The concept of 
brothels that cannot be found could not exist simply because they would not 
be economically viable. If few people know of their existence and if word of 
their existence and how to locate them is not spread, then their profits will be 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   66 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 67

limited. A brothel that cannot be found by potential customers would fail 
immediately. 

Locations where victims of kidnapping might be held, such as the house dis-
covered in 2013 in Cleveland, Ohio, where the victims had been held for over 
a decade, are not brothels.

Some brothels, such as those with children, will be far more cautious in admit-
ting customers than others and will provide information on their existence 
only to individuals whom they trust, usually including specific taxi drivers. 
Information on the location of such brothels will exist, but there are fewer 
persons and places to act as sources from where the information can be 
obtained. Conversations with multiple unattached males who are visiting the 
country and are encountered at bars and restaurants are often helpful in 
obtaining such location. Understanding the method of communication used 
in the advertising of sex workers’ services and of other illegal enterprises 
requiring customers for profitability, including sex trafficking, can be helpful 
in developing a method for locating such services. Some such places are hinted 
at in websites, but specific information on locations is almost never present. 

Once a researcher has located a place with trafficked women and children, he 
or she should contact the management personnel, as the management per-
sonnel in such places know who is under age and who has been trafficked. 
The researcher must determine methods of obtaining this information from 
management without arousing suspicion. Brief conversations with manage-
ment are part of the everyday work of brothels, can normally be conducted in 
English and arouse less suspicion than attempts to extract such information 
from workers. Most sex workers in a bar, brothel or other sex venue are avail-
able to leave with a customer. One indication that a sex worker may been 
trafficked is the inability of the sex worker to leave the venue. Another indica-
tion is the existence of a debt contract.

Elaboration of assumptions and rationale as they lead  
to location theory

Sex trafficking is a commercial enterprise. Its purpose is to make money. 
Repeat customers keep a sex venue afloat, but they alone cannot form the 
sizeable customer base for the level of profits that are its primary motive. In 
any society, some individuals are willing to provide sexual labour in exchange 
for something of value if the monetary reward is sufficient given their current 
economic position. As the management cost of sexual labour—the money 
received by the sex workers from management for their labour—increases, the 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   67 25/06/2015   11:16:54



68 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

desire of management in sex work venues to lower labour costs becomes more 
apparent. Using underpaid or unpaid labourers—persons who are forced to 
work at a rate that is lower than the going rate or children, who provide a 
greater profit margin—are possible solutions. This desire and its solutions 
lead to the trafficking of sex workers.

Greater profits are dependent on a constant stream of new customers. Some 
form of advertising is required in order to provide new customers for sex 
venues. Information about sex venues is often communicated by word of 
mouth, by contacting a population likely to be interested in the purchase of 
sexual services.

One efficient method of establishing such contact is through local persons 
who normally encounter potential customers and also serve to pre-screen 
potential customers to see if they are interested in sex venues. Local individu-
als generally make up the majority of the customer base for most sex venues. 
Local customers know the local price structure for sex and alternative loca-
tions where sexual services can be obtained. Thus, they provide less revenue 
per customer than travelling businessmen, military personnel, transportation 
workers such as truck drivers, and tourists, who may not know the prices or 
may not know whether similar services are available nearby. Increased profits 
are often related to the ability to contact this potential customer base. 

Because of the nature of sexual services, such contact requires a level of dis-
creetness and privacy. Public advertising, using, for example, the media or 
announcements made by a bus driver carrying a load of passengers into town 
from an airport, does not provide the necessary discreetness and privacy. Taxi 
and limousine services encounter the desired groups of travelling business-
men, military personnel and tourists. They normally transport passengers in 
smaller groups, providing the desired level of discreetness and privacy. Thus, 
taxi drivers provide an ideal medium for word-of-mouth advertising of sex 
businesses. They are often a principal source of new customers for sex venues 
in any area with sufficient population to support a taxi business. This position 
led to the method used in the study for locating women and children traf-
ficked for sexual purposes. 

Obtaining knowledge related to sex outlet locations can also occur by observ-
ing public locations such as airports, other transportation stations, restau-
rants, bars, hotel lobbies and the like. Such observational methods can be 
aided, if required, by considering the likely and the possible methods of trans-
mitting such information. The channels usually are not standard advertising 
methods—radio and television, billboards etc.—though they may provide 
hints of the existence of the illegal activity. Consideration of the demographic 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   68 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 69

characteristics of typical and prospective customers of the type of vice in 
question will often provide strong hints as to where to look, and perhaps a 
direct answer. 

Once initial information on possible locations is obtained, it can be used to 
approach and enter the venues in question and to access information con-
cerning what, if any, forms of the activity in question are available. How is it 
that persons seeking sex locate places that sell it? Some form of communica-
tion of this information is occurring. The method is to determine that form 
and then to tap into it using informants who are demographically similar to 
the principal customer base of the establishment to be entered.

Statistical analysis and direct observation

Statistical methods of studying crimes such as human trafficking provide 
important information on the size and often on the nature of the illegal activ-
ity over both large and small areas of land. Many researchers are rightly con-
cerned with estimating the size and range of human trafficking through 
statistical projections from available data. An alternative to such calculations 
is counting. Counting requires something to count, perhaps through the 
observation of human trafficking in progress. It is often more time-consuming 
than statistical projections and almost always involves a more limited geo-
graphical area in any one study. It often involves direct observation of the 
criminal activity in progress. Studies of the communication methods used in 
human trafficking and other illegal activity can provide information on the 
size and nature of trafficking, though such studies are usually restricted by the 
constraints of time and money and almost always require male rather than 
female informants concerning customers. An additional plus for methods 
based on communication systems is that they can provide information on the 
physical location of victims, an important item that statistical methods cannot 
provide with precision. 

Why study brothels rather than points of origin of sex trafficking?

Human trafficking is potentially visible throughout its sequence, from the 
victim’s point of origin, through any transit stages that may occur, to its des-
tination forms. The origin and transit stages are money losers for the traffick-
ers. Only in the destination stage, where the victim is put to work, does the 
trafficker begin to recoup any expenses incurred during the origin and transit 
stages. Human trafficking need not involve transportation to a new location. 
Such transportation, when it occurs, is often intended to remove the victim 
from familiar surroundings, where help for the victim is most likely to be 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   69 25/06/2015   11:16:54



70 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

available, and also to locate the victim at a point of destination that is likely to 
maximize profit and minimize risk of detection. Human trafficking is most 
often observed in that destination stage, due largely to the far longer period 
where trafficking victims may be held at a single location or at a few locations 
nearby. Once transported, victims may be kept in the vicinity of the same 
destination for weeks or months, sometimes longer. 

Many methods of locating human trafficking in its destination stage are avail-
able. It is possible to simply stumble upon human trafficking in the process of 
daily living; yet it is highly unlikely that this will occur. Most persons encoun-
tering human trafficking would not recognize it for what it is. This is also true 
of the point of origin and the transit stage of trafficking. Well-meaning cam-
paigns against trafficking often propose raising awareness of this form as the 
principal—and often the only—method of location, a suggestion doomed  
to failure for the vast majority of victims and observers. Most human traffick-
ing is not visible in any of its forms or stages to the general public through 
casual observation. If attempts by anti-trafficking groups to motivate the pub-
lic to immediately report to police or to a hotline any suspected instance of 
such trafficking were to succeed, the police or the hotline would be inundated 
with such reports. A likely result would be to store all the reports with the 
police, probably without prioritizing them, and the police would examine the 
reports when the time, money and officers became available. As the volume 
of reports increases, true reports become more difficult to sort out from the 
overload of false reports, and hotlines are of little help in processing such 
information accurately. 

How might sex trafficking victims be located in addition to counting? 

How might sex trafficking victims be located in addition to counting? The 
author asked this question in Cambodia. The methods used in three studies in 
Cambodia were similar, varying only in detail. Such data were first gathered in 
Cambodia in 2001. Three methods were used initially in Phnom Penh: moto 
taxi drivers; local government counts provided by the police; and a small-scale 
study using city block sampling. Information from a study by the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP) [4] and information from the 
World Gazetteer website was used to project the results obtained in Phnom 
Penh to the larger cities, towns and main highways of Cambodia outside of 
Phnom Penh to create a countrywide estimate of sex trafficking in Cambodia.

Taxi drivers were initially sought out as a principal source of information. The 
drivers usually operate motorbikes, referred to as motodops or simply motos. 
Moto drivers are among the principal customers of brothels and are aware of 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   70 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 71

most entertainment venues in their service area, in addition to receiving kick-
backs for customers they bring to those locations. They are often called upon 
by local customers to transport the customers to a location where sex is sold. 

Typically, a moto driver passing by in traffic is hailed by a lone team member 
and asked if the driver knows where sex can be purchased. (Drivers who are 
waiting for passengers are not selected.) The answer is invariably “yes”. The 
driver is then asked to transport the passenger to that location. On arrival, the 
team member unobtrusively clicks the Global Positioning System (GPS) in 
order to record the location, looks briefly at the venue from the outside and 
asks the driver if he would like to be paid or if he would like to show the pas-
senger another venue. In almost all cases the driver wishes to continue. The 
driver is encouraged to drive to “hidden” locations, in addition to popular 
locations, perhaps locations not often visited, or visited only by people with 
money, or locations with sex workers who are unusual in some way, or young. 
After several such locations have been recorded, the passenger pays the driver 
what is owed and asks if the driver would like to work with him longer for a 
set amount. The driver usually agrees to work longer, in which case the pro-
cess continues until the driver wants to stop or can think of no new places. If 
the driver does not agree to work longer, he is simply paid and, if there is time 
left, the team member then walks one or two blocks, hails another moto that 
is driving down the street (never one parked at a location) and continues the 
process. This provides a clean break between each successive moto driver on 
a given day and none know of the other’s work, or of any prior actions of the 
researcher. This process continued between 8 a.m. and 4 p.m., seven days 
a week. 

In the evening, the teams meet and the information from each GPS is trans-
ferred to a computer map of the area under study. The mapping of the 
obtained locations of sex venues was essentially ruled complete when inde-
pendent informants familiar with sex work locations in a given area produced 
no new venues in that area over several days. The product of this method is a 
GPS mapping of potential sex work locations for each area. In addition to 
these counts, which provided the main data for the study, local government 
counts of “entertainment places” (a euphemism for places where sex is sold) 
were provided by the police, and a small-scale study using city block sampling 
was carried out to check the reliability of the moto driver results. The 2002 
data were collected only in Phnom Penh and a study of the area outside of it 
was not carried out until the following year. 

The estimated number of sex workers found in Phnom Penh in 2002 was 
5,250, of whom 642 had probably been trafficked; it was estimated that 
2,488 sex workers had been trafficked throughout Cambodia (see tables 1-4). 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   71 25/06/2015   11:16:54



72 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Data provided by UNDP [3] on national highways and on city size from the 
World Gazetteer website [5] were used in estimating trafficking outside of 
Phnom Penh for the 2002 report.* These methods are presented in more 
detail in Steinfatt, Baker and Beesey [6]. 

In 2003, in a study funded by the United States Agency for International 
Development (USAID), data on human trafficking were gathered in all  
24 Cambodian provinces using the geographical mapping methods employed 
in Phnom Penh in 2002 [7]. 

Research teams

In 2008, funding from the award competition sponsored by the United 
Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human Trafficking on Best Methods of 
Studying Human Trafficking was used for the large-scale collection of data on 
sex trafficking throughout Cambodia [2]. While the 2002 and 2003 studies 
used only two research teams, six research teams were used in the 2008 study: 
five for gathering data in specific sections of the country and one for studying 
the entire country. The five teams studying specific sections of the country 
(teams A, B, C, D and E) each had four members: an expatriate as team 
leader and three local assistants. The team leader and the primary research 
assistant were experienced in trafficking research and were made aware of the 
purpose and nature of the research concerning trafficking. The other two 
local assistants on each team were hired as day labourers on the basis of their 
familiarity with the sex venues in a specific area. The sixth team, team F, was 
used only to locate sex venues throughout Cambodia in both the areas stud-
ied and those not studied by teams A-E.

The teams worked independently, did not meet each other and did not share 
information. Workers were not hired as team members if they were not famil-
iar with sex work venues catering to local males of their economic and socio-
demographic class. Their task was to do throughout Cambodia what the research 
teams had begun in Phnom Penh in 2002: to locate and then obtain data on 
possible trafficking in all populated locations in the country. Teams A and B 
studied Phnom Penh independently, while studies of the provinces outside of 
Phnom Penh were conducted independently by teams A, C, D and E. Each 
used different starting points and starting dates during July 2008 (see the map).

* The author subsequently learned that the data on city size from the World Gazetteer website were 
inaccurate. The World Gazetteer depends on figures provided by each country; in the case of 
Cambodia, the Ministry of Planning lists the entire population of each of the provinces in the country 
as though it were the population of the largest town or village in that province.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   72 25/06/2015   11:16:54



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 73

Location methods

Some data-gathering methods were modified to suit different conditions in 
the provinces. While there are hundreds of moto drivers in Phnom Penh, in 
smaller areas such as villages there are few drivers and they know each other. 
In such cases, one driver passing by is hailed and employed for brothel loca-
tion. The assistance of two or more local males is then requested, depending 
on the population size. If a male approached by a local assistant says that he 
knows the sex outlets in the area, he is asked to show the location to the 
assistant if it is not far. If it is some distance away, the male is then asked for 
specific directions, which are recorded. This process continues between 
8  a.m. and 4 p.m., seven days a week. The location data obtained in this 
manner were transferred at the end of each day to both a GPS map and a 
hardcopy map.

The mapping of the obtained sex venue locations is considered to be essentially 
complete when five consecutive independent informants familiar with sex work 
locations in a given area are no longer able to locate new venues in that area. 
The outcome of this method is a GPS mapping of potential sex work locations 
for each area. This location method was used by teams A, C, D and E. 

Team B, which focused on Phnom Penh and did not visit the countryside, 
used a different location method. Team B traversed each of the streets of the 
city and investigated each building for sex work and trafficking. The results 
for all teams in Phnom Penh were similar regardless of the method used.

Routes covered by research teams A, C, D and E

Legend for routes covered

 Black lines indicate routes 
covered by at least two of the five 
research teams.

 Blue lines indicate routes  
covered by at least one of the five 
research teams.

 

 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   73 25/06/2015   11:16:55



74 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Local team members were successful in locating many places with predomi-
nantly local clientele, usually brothels, massage establishments and karaoke 
clubs, and occasionally common evening meeting areas for dating, at times 
with freelance workers. Expatriate team members were also shown such ven-
ues, but they were often shown considerably higher-priced establishments as 
well, such as large expensive clubs. In some areas, particularly Bavet, Phnom 
Penh, Battambang, Pailin and Poipet, the clubs were occasionally part of a 
complex involving a hotel, or a hotel and casino. As in all of the studies, 
demographic similarity with the customers of each individual venue, includ-
ing their language and, where possible, their accent, was used as the selection 
criterion for the team members entering the establishments to gather data.

Data-gathering methods

Once the mapping is ruled to be complete for an area, the locations are visited 
to observe the demographics and languages of the customers entering and 
leaving the specific venue. When the customer demographics are determined 
for a specific brothel, club, hotel or any other location where sex is sold, a 
team member closely matching those demographics is selected. 

The team member enters the venue and makes a mental note of the number 
of sex workers present, including the number of “small ladies” (workers 
appearing to be under the age of 18), and their ethnicity, likely age, language, 
demeanour and other characteristics. He then asks whether any worker he 
chooses would be able to leave the establishment with him. If any cannot 
leave, he asks which ones or how many. He was encouraged to talk with the 
workers and management informally, just as he would in entering any brothel 
or other such venue. Informant reports to team members were often brief and 
in a simple form such as “five Vietnamese, one small and she cannot leave”. 
They were told to memorize the information, instead of taking notes, and 
never to take notes within or near any venue they surveyed. If an informant 
needed to make written notes, he could do that when he was out of sight of 
the venue.

At least two teams visited each located venue. Interviewers visited venues 
during normal working hours and, in populated areas such as a city, town or 
large village, at least one day apart between team visits. In smaller villages and 
rural areas, only one interviewer entered and collected data. The expatriate 
team member entered and obtained data from venues with an expatriate cus-
tomer base. If one of the local team members matched the venue’s customer 
demographics, that team member served as interviewer. If no team member 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   74 25/06/2015   11:16:55



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 75

matched the customer demographics, a local person, usually a moto driver 
who had not been encountered previously, was engaged in conversation by a 
local team member and asked if he was familiar with the venue in question. 
Potential interviewers were selected for the task only if they were reasonably 
talkative and responsive in their meeting with the team member, as they were 
to talk with the brothel workers and management and find out typical brothel 
information, such as whether particular workers could leave the brothel and 
whether any “small ladies” worked there but were not currently visible.

None of the research teams had contact with each other prior to submitting 
their final reports. GPS coordinates were used to identify venues and to col-
late data from the teams. Team F travelled the highways and all backroads of 
Cambodia over a period of several months to count and record GPS locations 
for all sex venues in the country. They did not enter locations and gather data. 
This provided a check on the coverage obtained by teams A-E. Their task was 
to travel through each province outside of Phnom Penh, principally to com-
pile a list of all sex venues located in Cambodia outside of Phnom Penh. Its 
members counted the total number of venues of each type in each area inde-
pendently of all other teams. These data were then compared with the data 
located, mapped and reported in the data set produced by teams A, C, D 
and E, creating a basis for an estimate of the extent of trafficking in the venues 
located by team F but missed by the other teams. 

Conversations with sex workers in Cambodia occurring since 1996 support 
the view that workers are normally free to leave the workplace with a cus-
tomer and are free to return to their homes when their work hours for the day 
are completed. Many sex venues do not have a place where sex can occur on 
the premises, and workers are expected to leave with customers. Brothels 
have areas used for sex on the premises and are always open for business, 
24 hours a day, even when the doors are locked and everyone inside is asleep. 
Police raids occurring between 2004 and 2008 may have increased caution 
among brothel management about openly providing information on women 
working off a debt. If management is concerned that a worker may run out on 
a debt, go to authorities or do something similar, that worker is probably not 
allowed to leave the premises. These were used as indications of trafficking in 
the 2008 study. Trafficked workers were defined as those under 18 years of 
age or those wanting to leave the venue but not allowed to do so (see 
tables 1-4).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   75 25/06/2015   11:16:55



76 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Table 1. Observed number of venues and estimated number of sex workers, by type 
of venue and province, corrected for workers not present and missed venues, 2008

  Province Variable

Direct Indirect  

Brothel
Massage 

establishment
Subtotal Karaoke club

Bar or 
restaurant

Beer pub Freelance Subtotal Total

1
Banteay 
Meanchey

Venues 15 13 28 36 40 3 15 94 122

Workers 79 72 151 696 411 21 75 1 203 1 354

2 Battambang
Venues 23 11 34 46 81 4 9 140 174

Workers 139 30 169 891 578 91 113 1 673 1 842

3 Kampong Cham
Venues 34 2 36 43 13 2 1 59 95

Workers 144 101 245 427 118 19 6 570 815

4
Kampong 
Chhnang

Venues 12 2 14 10 6 2 9 27 41

Workers 103 17 120 81 26 35 29 171 291

5 Kampong Speu
Venues 23 1 24 21 2 2 1 26 50

Workers 69 4 73 158 8 11 6 183 256

6 Kampong Thom
Venues 9 0 9 25 18 3 8 54 63

Workers 21 0 21 188 111 18 53 370 391

7 Kampot
Venues 10 2 12 11 2 7 1 21 33

Workers 33 7 40 59 9 61 7 136 176

8 Kandal
Venues 6 8 14 11 70 1 1 83 97

Workers 16 25 41 337 155 3 5 500 541

9 Koh Kong
Venues 9 2 11 27 6 2 0 35 46

Workers 60 11 71 159 87 6 0 252 323

10 Kratie
Venues 11 1 12 14 2 2 0 18 30

Workers 33 3 36 126 5 22 0 153 189

11 Mondul Kiri
Venues 5 2 7 9 2 0 0 11 18

Workers 10 7 17 91 8 0 0 99 116

12 Phnom Penh
Venues 34 219 253 136 317 13 49 515 768

Workers 217 2 277 2 494 4 986 6 416 361 813 12 576 15 070

13 Preah Vihear
Venues 33 4 37 47 29 4 5 85 122

Workers 101 9 110 64 46 15 34 159 269

14 Prey Veng
Venues 17 1 18 36 1 0 0 37 55

Workers 54 3 57 188 4 0 0 192 249

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   76 25/06/2015   11:16:55



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 77

Table 1. Observed number of venues and estimated number of sex workers, by type 
of venue and province, corrected for workers not present and missed venues, 2008

  Province Variable

Direct Indirect  

Brothel
Massage 

establishment
Subtotal Karaoke club

Bar or 
restaurant

Beer pub Freelance Subtotal Total

1
Banteay 
Meanchey

Venues 15 13 28 36 40 3 15 94 122

Workers 79 72 151 696 411 21 75 1 203 1 354

2 Battambang
Venues 23 11 34 46 81 4 9 140 174

Workers 139 30 169 891 578 91 113 1 673 1 842

3 Kampong Cham
Venues 34 2 36 43 13 2 1 59 95

Workers 144 101 245 427 118 19 6 570 815

4
Kampong 
Chhnang

Venues 12 2 14 10 6 2 9 27 41

Workers 103 17 120 81 26 35 29 171 291

5 Kampong Speu
Venues 23 1 24 21 2 2 1 26 50

Workers 69 4 73 158 8 11 6 183 256

6 Kampong Thom
Venues 9 0 9 25 18 3 8 54 63

Workers 21 0 21 188 111 18 53 370 391

7 Kampot
Venues 10 2 12 11 2 7 1 21 33

Workers 33 7 40 59 9 61 7 136 176

8 Kandal
Venues 6 8 14 11 70 1 1 83 97

Workers 16 25 41 337 155 3 5 500 541

9 Koh Kong
Venues 9 2 11 27 6 2 0 35 46

Workers 60 11 71 159 87 6 0 252 323

10 Kratie
Venues 11 1 12 14 2 2 0 18 30

Workers 33 3 36 126 5 22 0 153 189

11 Mondul Kiri
Venues 5 2 7 9 2 0 0 11 18

Workers 10 7 17 91 8 0 0 99 116

12 Phnom Penh
Venues 34 219 253 136 317 13 49 515 768

Workers 217 2 277 2 494 4 986 6 416 361 813 12 576 15 070

13 Preah Vihear
Venues 33 4 37 47 29 4 5 85 122

Workers 101 9 110 64 46 15 34 159 269

14 Prey Veng
Venues 17 1 18 36 1 0 0 37 55

Workers 54 3 57 188 4 0 0 192 249

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   77 25/06/2015   11:16:55



78 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

  Province Variable

Direct Indirect  

Brothel
Massage 

establishment
Subtotal Karaoke club

Bar or 
restaurant

Beer pub Freelance Subtotal Total

15 Pursat
Venues 7 3 10 9 12 2 5 28 38

Workers 42 14 56 42 61 23 56 182 238

16 Ratanak Kiri
Venues 9 1 10 13 4 0 0 17 27

Workers 37 9 46 135 25 0 0 160 206

17 Siem Reap
Venues 18 8 26 55 22 9 0 86 112

Workers 104 434 538 1 560 621 306 0 2 487 3 025

18 Sihanoukville
Venues 23 3 26 55 17 3 2 77 103

Workers 114 62 176 766 267 49 37 1 119 1 295

19 Stung Treng
Venues 1 1 2 20 2 1 0 23 25

Workers 5 2 7 74 9 6 0 89 96

20 Svay Rieng
Venues 13 0 13 22 2 0 0 24 37

Workers 69 0 69 131 5 0 0 136 205

21 Takeo
Venues 38 2 40 41 8 0 0 49 89

Workers 145 5 150 175 46 0 0 221 371

22 Odar Meanchey
Venues 12 0 12 21 9 0 0 30 42

Workers 67 0 67 145 45 0 0 190 257

23 Kep
Venues 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 2 3

Workers 0 3 3 9 0 0 0 9 12

24 Pailin
Venues 15 3 18 6 6 0 0 12 30

Workers 147 12 159 36 143 0 0 179 338

Outside Phnom Penh
Venues 343 71 414 580 354 47 57 1 038 1 452

Workers 1 592 830 2 422 6 538 2 788 686 421 10 433 12 855

Cambodia
Venues 377 290 667 716 671 60 106 1 553 2 220

Workers 1 809 3 107 4 916 11 524 9 204 1 047 1 234 23 009 27 925

Notes:

Venues: the observed number of venues, meaning the number of venues of a given type observed by 
team F during 2008

Workers: estimated number of workers

Table 1. Observed number of venues and estimated number of sex workers, by type 
of venue and province, corrected for workers not present and missed venues, 2008 
(continued)

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   78 25/06/2015   11:16:55



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 79

  Province Variable

Direct Indirect  

Brothel
Massage 

establishment
Subtotal Karaoke club

Bar or 
restaurant

Beer pub Freelance Subtotal Total

15 Pursat
Venues 7 3 10 9 12 2 5 28 38

Workers 42 14 56 42 61 23 56 182 238

16 Ratanak Kiri
Venues 9 1 10 13 4 0 0 17 27

Workers 37 9 46 135 25 0 0 160 206

17 Siem Reap
Venues 18 8 26 55 22 9 0 86 112

Workers 104 434 538 1 560 621 306 0 2 487 3 025

18 Sihanoukville
Venues 23 3 26 55 17 3 2 77 103

Workers 114 62 176 766 267 49 37 1 119 1 295

19 Stung Treng
Venues 1 1 2 20 2 1 0 23 25

Workers 5 2 7 74 9 6 0 89 96

20 Svay Rieng
Venues 13 0 13 22 2 0 0 24 37

Workers 69 0 69 131 5 0 0 136 205

21 Takeo
Venues 38 2 40 41 8 0 0 49 89

Workers 145 5 150 175 46 0 0 221 371

22 Odar Meanchey
Venues 12 0 12 21 9 0 0 30 42

Workers 67 0 67 145 45 0 0 190 257

23 Kep
Venues 0 1 1 2 0 0 0 2 3

Workers 0 3 3 9 0 0 0 9 12

24 Pailin
Venues 15 3 18 6 6 0 0 12 30

Workers 147 12 159 36 143 0 0 179 338

Outside Phnom Penh
Venues 343 71 414 580 354 47 57 1 038 1 452

Workers 1 592 830 2 422 6 538 2 788 686 421 10 433 12 855

Cambodia
Venues 377 290 667 716 671 60 106 1 553 2 220

Workers 1 809 3 107 4 916 11 524 9 204 1 047 1 234 23 009 27 925

Notes:

Venues: the observed number of venues, meaning the number of venues of a given type observed by 
team F during 2008

Workers: estimated number of workers

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   79 25/06/2015   11:16:56



80 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Table 2. Observed number of venues with trafficking and management/sex  worker 
estimates of trafficked women and children, by ethnicity and trafficked status, 2008

Area Observed number of venues with trafficking Number of trafficked women  and children Trafficked status
a

Name Total

Type of venue

Total

Ethnicity Under 18 years  of age Cannot leave

Brothel Massage establishment Other
Viet-

namese Khmer Chinese
Viet- 

namese Khmer
Viet- 

namese Khmer Chinese

1 Banteay Meanchey 3 3 0 0 12 0 12 0 0 7 0 5 0

2 Battambang 2 2 0 0 11 0 11 0 0 5 0 7 0

3 Kampong Cham 7 7 0 0 43 4 39 0 4 3 0 36 0

4 Kampong Chhnang 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

5 Kampong Speu 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

6 Kampong Thom 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

7 Kampot 1 1 0 0 5 5 0 0 5 0 0 0 0

8 Kandal 4 2 2 0 16 12 4 0 0 3 12 4 0

9 Koh Kong 2 2 0 0 11 5 6 0 0 0 5 6 0

10 Kratie 1 1 0 0 4 1 3 0 0 0 1 3 0

11 Mondul Kiri 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

12 Phnom Penh 25 13 7 5 200 35 142 23 22 37 28 129 23

13 Preah Vihear 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

14 Prey Veng 1 1 0 0 4 4 0 0 0 0 4 0 0

15 Pursat 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

16 Ratanak Kiri 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

17 Siem Reap 6 5 1 0 39 15 24 0 15 5 12 19 0

18 Sihanoukville 6 4 0 2 29 7 22 0 3 8 7 20 0

19 Stung Treng 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

20 Svay Rieng 4 4 0 0 21 16 5 0 3 3 14 4 0

21 Takeo 6 6 0 0 38 38 0 0 4 0 38 0 0

22 Odar Meanchey 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

23 Kep 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

24 Pailin 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

Outside Phnom Penh 43 38 3 2 233 107 126 0 34 34 93 104 0

Cambodia 68 51 10 7 433 142 268 23 56 71 121 233 23

 a Numbers under “Trafficked status” are not always independent, as the same individual, can be 
classified as both “Under 18 years of age” and “Cannot leave”, and will not necessarily add to 
numbers under “Number of trafficked women and children”.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   80 25/06/2015   11:16:56



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 81

Table 2. Observed number of venues with trafficking and management/sex  worker 
estimates of trafficked women and children, by ethnicity and trafficked status, 2008

Area Observed number of venues with trafficking Number of trafficked women  and children Trafficked status
a

Name Total

Type of venue

Total

Ethnicity Under 18 years  of age Cannot leave

Brothel Massage establishment Other
Viet-

namese Khmer Chinese
Viet- 

namese Khmer
Viet- 

namese Khmer Chinese

1 Banteay Meanchey 3 3 0 0 12 0 12 0 0 7 0 5 0

2 Battambang 2 2 0 0 11 0 11 0 0 5 0 7 0

3 Kampong Cham 7 7 0 0 43 4 39 0 4 3 0 36 0

4 Kampong Chhnang 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

5 Kampong Speu 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

6 Kampong Thom 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

7 Kampot 1 1 0 0 5 5 0 0 5 0 0 0 0

8 Kandal 4 2 2 0 16 12 4 0 0 3 12 4 0

9 Koh Kong 2 2 0 0 11 5 6 0 0 0 5 6 0

10 Kratie 1 1 0 0 4 1 3 0 0 0 1 3 0

11 Mondul Kiri 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

12 Phnom Penh 25 13 7 5 200 35 142 23 22 37 28 129 23

13 Preah Vihear 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

14 Prey Veng 1 1 0 0 4 4 0 0 0 0 4 0 0

15 Pursat 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

16 Ratanak Kiri 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

17 Siem Reap 6 5 1 0 39 15 24 0 15 5 12 19 0

18 Sihanoukville 6 4 0 2 29 7 22 0 3 8 7 20 0

19 Stung Treng 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

20 Svay Rieng 4 4 0 0 21 16 5 0 3 3 14 4 0

21 Takeo 6 6 0 0 38 38 0 0 4 0 38 0 0

22 Odar Meanchey 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

23 Kep 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

24 Pailin 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

Outside Phnom Penh 43 38 3 2 233 107 126 0 34 34 93 104 0

Cambodia 68 51 10 7 433 142 268 23 56 71 121 233 23

 a Numbers under “Trafficked status” are not always independent, as the same individual, can be 
classified as both “Under 18 years of age” and “Cannot leave”, and will not necessarily add to 
numbers under “Number of trafficked women and children”.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   81 25/06/2015   11:16:56



82 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Table 3. Comparison of high-end estimated number of trafficked women and 
children, by ethnicity and trafficking type, in Cambodia, 2002, 2003 and 2008

Year
Ethnicity How traffickeda Area of trafficking

Khmer Vietnamese Other
Cambodia 

(total)
Under 18 

years of age
Debt contract Cannot leave

Cambodia 
(total)

Phnom Penh Provinces
Cambodia 

(total)

2002 117 2 363 7 2 488 .. 2 488 .. 2 488 1 638b 8 503 2 488

2003 378 1 607 15 2 000 369 1 631 .. 2 000 .. .. 2 000

2008 668 334 56 1 058 3 104 .. 9 214 1 058 445 613 1 058

Source: Thomas M. Steinfatt and Simon Baker, Measuring the Extent of Sex Trafficking in Cambodia: 
2008 (Bangkok, United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human Trafficking, 2011), table 7.

 a The entries under the column headings “Under 18 years of age”, “Debt contract” and “Cannot 
leave” are not independent so they may not add up to the total for Cambodia.

 b 31.2 per cent of 5,250.

Table 4. Estimated number of sex workers in Cambodia, based on 10 national  
studies, 1997-2008

Study Research group Year
Number of sex workers

Direct Indirect Total 

1 National Assembly 1997 14 725 - 14 725

2 NCHADS 1997 6 002 5 309 11 311

3 NCHADS 1998 6 235 6 119 12 354

4 NCHADS 2000 3 872 7 004 10 876

5 NCHADS 2002 4 403 4 154 8 557

8 Steinfatt, Baker and Beesey 2002 5 324 15 505 20 829

6 NCHADS 2003 3 764 7 049 10 813

7 NCHADS 2003a 5 009 10 292 15 301

9 Steinfatt 2003 5 011 13 245 18 256

10 Steinfatt and Baker 2008 4 916 23 009 27 925

Mean of studies 1-10 5 926 10 187 15 095

Mean of studies 2-10 4 948 10 187 15 136

Mean of studies 2-7 4 881 6 655 11 535

Mean of studies 8-10 5 084 17 253 22 337

Sources: Thomas M. Steinfatt, Simon Baker and Allan Beesey, “Measuring the number of trafficked  
women in Cambodia: 2002”, part I, November 2002; and Thomas M. Steinfatt and Simon Baker,  
Measuring the Extent of Sex Trafficking in Cambodia: 2008 (Bangkok, United Nations Inter-Agency  
Project on Human Trafficking, 2011), table 8. 

Note: NCHADS: National Center for HIV/AIDS, Dermatology and STD of Cambodia.

 a Data listed by NCHADS as its most reliable data collected to that date.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   82 25/06/2015   11:16:56



Calculations versus counting human trafficking numbers 83

Table 3. Comparison of high-end estimated number of trafficked women and 
children, by ethnicity and trafficking type, in Cambodia, 2002, 2003 and 2008

Year
Ethnicity How traffickeda Area of trafficking

Khmer Vietnamese Other
Cambodia 

(total)
Under 18 

years of age
Debt contract Cannot leave

Cambodia 
(total)

Phnom Penh Provinces
Cambodia 

(total)

2002 117 2 363 7 2 488 .. 2 488 .. 2 488 1 638b 8 503 2 488

2003 378 1 607 15 2 000 369 1 631 .. 2 000 .. .. 2 000

2008 668 334 56 1 058 3 104 .. 9 214 1 058 445 613 1 058

Source: Thomas M. Steinfatt and Simon Baker, Measuring the Extent of Sex Trafficking in Cambodia: 
2008 (Bangkok, United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human Trafficking, 2011), table 7.

 a The entries under the column headings “Under 18 years of age”, “Debt contract” and “Cannot 
leave” are not independent so they may not add up to the total for Cambodia.

 b 31.2 per cent of 5,250.

Table 4. Estimated number of sex workers in Cambodia, based on 10 national  
studies, 1997-2008

Study Research group Year
Number of sex workers

Direct Indirect Total 

1 National Assembly 1997 14 725 - 14 725

2 NCHADS 1997 6 002 5 309 11 311

3 NCHADS 1998 6 235 6 119 12 354

4 NCHADS 2000 3 872 7 004 10 876

5 NCHADS 2002 4 403 4 154 8 557

8 Steinfatt, Baker and Beesey 2002 5 324 15 505 20 829

6 NCHADS 2003 3 764 7 049 10 813

7 NCHADS 2003a 5 009 10 292 15 301

9 Steinfatt 2003 5 011 13 245 18 256

10 Steinfatt and Baker 2008 4 916 23 009 27 925

Mean of studies 1-10 5 926 10 187 15 095

Mean of studies 2-10 4 948 10 187 15 136

Mean of studies 2-7 4 881 6 655 11 535

Mean of studies 8-10 5 084 17 253 22 337

Sources: Thomas M. Steinfatt, Simon Baker and Allan Beesey, “Measuring the number of trafficked  
women in Cambodia: 2002”, part I, November 2002; and Thomas M. Steinfatt and Simon Baker,  
Measuring the Extent of Sex Trafficking in Cambodia: 2008 (Bangkok, United Nations Inter-Agency  
Project on Human Trafficking, 2011), table 8. 

Note: NCHADS: National Center for HIV/AIDS, Dermatology and STD of Cambodia.

 a Data listed by NCHADS as its most reliable data collected to that date.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   83 25/06/2015   11:16:56



84 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

References

 1. Thomas M. Steinfatt, Working at the Bar: Sex Work and Health Communication in 
Thailand (Westport, Connecticut, Ablex Publishing, 2002). http://www.amazon.com/
Working-Bar-Communication-Discourse-Millennium/dp/156750566X

 2. Thomas M. Steinfatt, Research on trafficking in persons in Cambodia. Paper 
presented at the international roundtable discussion on trafficking in women and 
children sponsored by the Asia Foundation, held in Phnom Penh on 11 May 2004. 

 3. Thomas M. Steinfatt and Simon Baker, Measuring the Extent of Sex Trafficking in 
Cambodia: 2008 (Bangkok, United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human Traffick-
ing, 2011). http://www.no-trafficking.org/reports_docs/estimates/uniap_cb_estimates_
report.pdf

 4. United Nations Development Programme, Cambodia HIV Vulnerability Map-
ping: Highways One and Five (Bangkok, 2000). http://www.hivdevelopment.org/pdf_
files/200001%20Cambodia%20HIV%20Vulnerability%20Mapping.pdf

 5. Environmental Systems Research Institute, ESRI Data and Maps 2000: an 
ESRI White Paper (Redlands, California, 2001), CD-ROM. 

 6. Thomas M. Steinfatt, Simon Baker and Allan Beesey, “Measuring the number 
of trafficked women in Cambodia: 2002”; part I, November 2002. http://www.
childtrafficking.com/Docs/steinfatt_2002_measuring_cambodia.pdf

 7. Thomas M. Steinfatt, “Measuring the number of trafficked women and children 
in Cambodia: a direct observation field study”, part III, October 2003. http://www.
childtrafficking.com/Docs/steinfatt_2003__measuring_t.pdf

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   84 25/06/2015   11:16:56



85

PROPOSED UTILIZATION OF THE NETWORK  
SCALE-UP METHOD TO ESTIMATE THE PREVALENCE  
OF TRAFFICKED PERSONS

By Janie F. Shelton*

Abstract

Trafficking in persons is one of the gravest of crimes, but the scope and extent 
of the crime as measured by the number of victims have scarcely been quanti-
fied. Generating data on the population of trafficked persons presents a 
unique challenge because it tends to be a very hidden population—much 
more hidden than other hidden populations, such as the homeless population 
or the drug-injecting population. Epidemiological methods to detect hidden 
populations have advanced in recent years, with a variety of research papers 
describing the use of the network scale-up method to detect key affected and 
other subpopulations. The approach relies on conducting a survey of the gen-
eral population, in which questions are asked about the number of individuals 
of interest in the personal network of the respondent and a specific set of 
questions are devised to estimate the size of the respondent’s network. Advan-
tages include the detection of multiple populations of trafficked persons in 
one survey, the minimization of harm to respondents for divulging first-hand 
knowledge, and improved statistical accuracy achieved by averaging over a 
large sample. Disadvantages include limited knowledge of the covariates of 
the population being surveyed.

Keywords: epidemiological methods, hidden populations, network scale-up method, 
trafficking in persons

Introduction

Trafficking in persons is a complex criminal act whereby a person is coerced 
into an exploited circumstance, for the purposes of slavery, organ removal, sex-
ual exploitation or other form of forced labour, and it involves a wide range of 

* Statistics and Surveys Section, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   85 25/06/2015   11:16:56



86 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

transportation scenarios, either within or across national borders.* Trafficking 
in persons is a crime most often detected from reported incidents—which rep-
resents only a fraction of all cases, with the vast majority of victims hidden from 
view. In 2012, the International Labour Organization (ILO) estimated that 
there were 20.9 million persons in forced labour and recommended more 
national surveys to produce better global estimates in the future [1]. 

Because of the extremely hidden nature of trafficking in persons and the varied 
aspects of the exploitation that takes place, estimating the prevalence or number 
of victims of such trafficking presents a unique challenge. While various estab-
lished epidemiological methods to survey hidden populations could be consid-
ered, in the present article, a less known technique is discussed: the network 
scale-up method, a method that is implemented in a survey of the general popu-
lation. The network scale-up method was specifically designed to estimate the 
size of hard-to-count or impossible-to-count populations.** Owing to recent devel-
opments in the field, it holds promise as a research method for estimating the 
dark number of trafficked persons at the national level for a variety of reasons. 

Primarily, the network scale-up method is distinguished from other methods 
used to detect hidden populations (e.g. multiplier methods, the capture-
recapture method or respondent-driven sampling) because it leverages data 
from a survey conducted among the general population instead of among 
victims or perpetrators of trafficking in persons, who may be difficult or 
impossible to find or unwilling to talk. 

The underlying principle is that some fraction of the general population will 
know someone who fits the case definition (in this case, someone who has been 
trafficked)—and the average prevalence of trafficked persons within networks 
of individuals from the general population will approximate the population 
prevalence of the subpopulation itself (see the figure). While this article does 
not include a comprehensive review of the methodology, it presents some of the 
key ideas to consider prior to designing a study that uses the network scale-up 
method to measure the prevalence of trafficking in persons at the national or 
subnational level.

* In article 3 of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially 
Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational 
Organized Crime [2], “trafficking in persons” is defined as follows: “Trafficking in persons shall mean 
the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of threat or use 
of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a 
position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of 
a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall 
include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual 
exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal 
of organs” (General Assembly resolution 55/25, annex II).

** A comprehensive review of this methodology can be found in Bernard and others [2].

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   86 25/06/2015   11:16:56



Proposed utilization of the method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons 87

Principle of the network scale-up method

The average prevalence of the subpopulation across a sample of net-
works of individuals from the general population will reflect the distri-
bution, or overall prevalence, of that subpopulation in that society:

𝑚𝑚
𝑐𝑐

=
𝑒𝑒
𝑡𝑡
 

where:

m = number of people in a subgroup that the respondent knows

c = social network size of the survey respondent

e = population size of the subgroup

t = general population size

Background

The network scale-up method was first developed and published by H.R. Ber-
nard and C. McCarty, professors at the University of Florida. One of the earli-
est surveys was based on a need to estimate the number of deaths from the 
earthquake in Mexico City in 1985, where it was observed: “There must be 
thousands dead—everyone knows someone who died.” While it is relatively 
straightforward to ask a sample of the general population how many people 
they knew who had died in the earthquake, estimating their personal network 
size proved more challenging. Using research methods and social network 
theory, the idea that it is possible to estimate the population prevalence by 
leveraging information stored within the social network has evolved.

In 1998, Killworth and others [3] compared estimates of the seroprevalence 
of HIV, rape and homelessness in the United States with other known esti-
mates and found them to be comparable in all three cases.* Since then, the 
network scale-up method has been used by a variety of researchers to esti-
mate hidden populations such as the number of heroin users in cities in the 
United States [4], populations at risk of HIV in Ukraine [5], heavy drug users 

* In other words, the estimates were within the confidence intervals of previously published 
estimates.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   87 25/06/2015   11:16:57



88 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

in Curitiba, Brazil [6], HIV-affected populations in Chongqing, China [7], 
groups at risk of HIV/AIDS in Kerman, Islamic Republic of Iran [8], and the 
population size of men who have sex with men in Japan [9]. 

In the study evaluating the population size of men who have sex with men in 
Japan, an Internet-based survey approach was used; the results were similar to 
other reported estimates. The approach offered a variety of benefits, including 
efficiency, simplicity and low cost compared with conventional methods [9]. 
In the study to evaluate the size of groups at risk of HIV/AIDS in Kerman, 
Islamic Republic of Iran, two different methods were contrasted: probability 
(that you know just one person in the subpopulation of interest); and frequency 
(the number of people you know) [8]. Both of these approaches can be used at 
the analytical phase without consideration in the survey design, but for highly 
stigmatized issues it is worthy of consideration to ask “Do you know at least one 
person who …?” as opposed to “How many people do you know who…?”.

The broad international spectrum of publications using this method has pro-
duced a rich literature on the effectiveness and constraints of the method 
itself, as well as validation of the approach by comparison with other reliable 
sources or previous estimates. Perhaps most useful are the questions posed to 
estimate the personal network sizes in each publication, which relies on cul-
turally specific information and available data in each milieu. 

Methodology

The calculation of the prevalence of a hidden population using the network 
scale-up method requires two key components: 

 (a) Estimating the personal network size of members of a random 
sample of the population using: 

where:

ĉl = personal network size of person i
mij = number of people in subpopulation j known by person i (e.g. the number 

of women known to person i who gave birth)

ej = size of subgroup j (e.g. the number of women who gave birth in the total 
population (known))

t = size of the general population (known)

�̂�𝑐𝑖𝑖  = 
∑ 𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
∑ 𝑒𝑒𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖

∗ 𝑡𝑡 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   88 25/06/2015   11:16:57



Proposed utilization of the method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons 89

 (b) Estimating the number of members of a hidden subpopulation 
(e.g.  trafficked persons) and standard error of the estimate:

where:

ê = estimated size of the hidden population
m = number of people known by person i

ĉ = estimated personal network size of person I
t = size of the general population (known)

Note: m and ĉ can come from different sources.

Challenges to consider

What does it mean to “know someone”? How to estimate ĉ? 

In 2010, a critical development in this area came from a paper by McCormick, 
Salganik and Zhen describing the best ways to estimate the denominator, or the 
personal network size of the survey respondents. The suggested working defini-
tion of “to know someone” is “that you know them and they know you by sight 
or by name, that you could contact them, that they live within [your country] 
and that there has been some contact (either in person or by telephone or mail) 
in the past 2 years” [10].

There are two prevailing approaches to estimating personal network size (e.g. 
the denominator of the respondent): the scale-up method and the summation 
method. The scale-up method relies on the fraction of a known population 
who are known to an individual (e.g. the number of police officers known to 
a (fictitious) person named Sam). If Sam knows 2 police officers and there are 
30,000 police officers in the country, Sam knows 2/30,000 people in the 
country). For most surveys, approximately 15-20 known population sizes are 
estimated. For examples of known populations, see the table. 

�̂�𝑒 =
∑ 𝑚𝑚𝑖𝑖𝑖𝑖
∑ 𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖�𝑖𝑖

∗ 𝑡𝑡  
 

𝑆𝑆.𝐸𝐸. ��̂�𝑒𝑖𝑖  � = �
�̂�𝑒𝑖𝑖  
∑ 𝑐𝑐𝑖𝑖�𝑖𝑖

∗ 𝑡𝑡 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   89 25/06/2015   11:16:57



90 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Examples of known populations used to estimate personal network size of 
 respondents using the question “How many … do you know?”

Examples of known populations in the context of 
China (drawn from Guo and others)

Examples of known populations in the context of  
the United Statesa

Males aged 20-24 years Women named Rose
Females aged 20-24 years Men named Jack
Females aged 70 or older Women named Gloria
Government officials Women who gave birth in the past year
Registered policemen Men who are in the armed forces
Registered physicians Postal workers

Sources: Wei Guo and others, “Estimating the size of HIV key affected populations in Chongqing, China, 
using the network scale-up method”, PLoS One, vol. 8, No. 8 (2013); and Tyler H. McCormick, Matthew J. 
Salganik and Tian Zhen, “How many people do you know?: efficiently estimating personal network size”, 
Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 105, No. 489 (2010). 
 a Names deserve careful consideration and must only represent 0.1-0.2 per cent of the population 
(according to McCormick, Salganik and Zhen).

Research on known population sizes shows that the best results are obtained 
when the known population size is between 1 and 5 per cent of the population 
[6]. The scale-up method requires that the survey include a range of questions 
regarding known populations so that the estimated network size is averaged 
over a broad grouping of people. The summation method involves adding 
together the respondents’ answers for segments of their network (e.g. family 
members, work colleagues, sports teammates, church associates). (For more 
details on each technique, see McCormick, Salganik and Zhen [10].)

Estimation effects: recalling characteristics of people who are known 
is not perfect

If a person lives in a community where trafficking victims are known to be tar-
geted, it is likely that the person knows something about some people, but not 
everything about everyone the person knows. Though larger sample sizes can 
account for random sampling error, response error cannot be accounted for [11].

Barrier effects: there are different probabilities of knowing someone 
in the hidden population among members of the general population

Victims of trafficking may be known only to members of certain villages, or 
among marginalized subpopulations. Therefore, sampling methods would 
need to consider the likelihood of encountering someone who knows a traf-
ficking victim in the general population, and potentially oversample in areas 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   90 25/06/2015   11:16:57



Proposed utilization of the method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons 91

where those persons may be found to ensure that the survey does not only 
detect null responses. In this case, sampling weights would be needed to 
account for the sampling scheme.

Transmission error: would a person know if someone in his or her 
personal network had been a victim of human trafficking?

It is likely that many victims of exploitation do not reveal to their friends and 
family the full extent of their condition—which may vary depending on the 
type of exploitation. For example, in some countries, qualitative research 
shows that families are involved in facilitating the process for remuneration—
but in many cases, the true nature of the event is only known to the traffickers 
and victims themselves. Transmission error, defined as the limited number of 
persons within an individual’s network who will know about the crime or 
circumstances of the individual, is a particular challenge for research on the 
subject of trafficked persons. Further, it has been shown that transmission 
error is more likely with highly stigmatized behaviours. Qualitative research in 
advance of developing a survey method would allow for an estimate of trans-
mission error to be developed—and a correction factor can be calculated to 
compensate for this bias.

Implementation

The implementation of the network scale-up method survey requires a plan-
ning trajectory similar to that of the general population survey and can be 
easily embedded in a national population survey with a different focus—but 
it differs in terms of formative research. Pilot testing is critical to understand-
ing the best known populations to use for the scale-up network size estimates, 
to avoid wasted time and missed opportunities in the final survey. For exam-
ple, in advance of designing the survey questionnaire, researchers must estab-
lish a list of 15-20 known population sizes to generate the network size 
estimates and pilot test the size estimates. Once the pilot test results come in, 
back-calculation methods are used to validate the population sizes and isolate 
network size estimation to the populations that fell within a reasonable range 
of the true population size. The questionnaire can be shortened once poorly 
performing known population sizes are identified. (For a good example of 
how this is done, see Guo and others [7].)

One key component of the formative research component of measuring the 
prevalence of human trafficking using the network scale-up method is the 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   91 25/06/2015   11:16:57



92 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

estimation of transmission error. How many people who are trafficked tell 
anyone they know what has happened to them? Interviews with a sample of 
the population of interest should lend insight into the size of the network of 
people who “know” about the condition of their contact. It has been docu-
mented that key affected populations such as HIV-positive individuals only 
reveal their status to approximately one third of the people in their personal 
network. Thus, the correction factor for transmission error is quite important 
in estimating the true size of the population of interest.

Strengths and weaknesses of using the network scale-up method to 
estimate the prevalence of trafficking in persons

A key weakness of the network scale-up method approach is the lack of covar-
iates. If interviewers made direct contact with victims, covariates such as age, 
race, education and other data on other characteristics could easily be col-
lected to further describe the subpopulation of victims of trafficking in per-
sons—but because the estimate is produced based on the number known to 
members of the general population, these microdata would not be available.

However, with data obtained by the network scale-up method, estimates of 
the age and gender profiles of the target population (e.g. trafficked persons) 
can be made using statistical methods. These methods are based on leverag-
ing information about the respondents’ network characteristics to impute 
covariate data. (For more on this, see McCormick and Zheng [12]).

The strengths of using the network scale-up method include minimization of 
random error, the ability to estimate several hidden populations simultane-
ously, and lower risk to victims of the crime. Because of the natural averaging 
over an adequate sample size, the effects of random error from small numbers 
will be minimized when the network scale-up method is used, which not the 
case in surveys of victims. While in surveys of victims, valuable qualitative 
information can be learned, such quantification relies on larger numbers, as 
random error declines as the sample size increases. Finally, the network scale-
up method can be used as a survey module within a larger national survey, 
both to increase the sample size and minimize the costs.

A particularly relevant advantage for using the network scale-up method for 
national surveys of human trafficking is its ability to ask about several sub-
populations in one survey. For example, if both men and women are traf-
ficked in a given country, but for different reasons, questions could be asked 
about women trafficked for the purpose of sexual exploitation, men trafficked 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   92 25/06/2015   11:16:57



Proposed utilization of the method to estimate the prevalence of trafficked persons 93

for the purpose of forced labour and persons who may be vulnerable to such 
trafficking, such as sex workers or day labourers.

Finally, using the network scale-up method does not require researchers to 
find victims of such trafficking, who may be inaccessible for a number or rea-
sons or who may themselves obfuscate their situation out of fear. Researchers 
must also be mindful of the fact that asking victims sensitive questions may 
put the victims at risk of becoming involved in other crime. 

Specific recommendations on using the network scale-up method  
for estimating the prevalence of trafficking in persons  
at the national level

Researchers using the network scale-up method to estimate the prevalence of 
trafficking in persons at the national level should:

(a) Conduct in-depth interviews with a number of victims or family members 
of victims to understand the dynamics of information transmission to the family and 
community from the victim. Who would they tell or not tell about their circum-
stances? When did they become fully aware of the situation and when did 
their families and community become aware? For example, do all men traf-
ficked for the purpose of forced labour tell their wives of their circumstances 
right away? Or do they wait until they see them in person to reveal the truth? 
There are examples of studies using the network scale-up method where this 
type of formative research on transmission error improved estimates 
considerably; 

(b) Consider adding a module to evaluate the stigma associated with each 
type of exploitation. For example, in a study of key affected populations in 
China, respondents were asked to rank their respect for each type of popula-
tion (men who have sex with men, injection drug users etc.), from 1 (very 
low) to 5 (very high). This approach was then used to weight the responses 
with the assumption that those with a neutral opinion were less likely to 
underreport or overreport than those with a non-neutral opinion;

(c) Whenever possible, use multiple methods to estimate the number of victims 
of trafficking in persons in the same place to validate network scale-up method 
against other indirect estimation techniques (e.g. the network scale-up method along-
side multiplier methods or the capture-recapture method). This approach and the 
publication of this approach will help to move forward research in this field 
and to identify the most effective techniques in each circumstance.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   93 25/06/2015   11:16:57



94 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

References

 1. International Labour Organization, “ILO global estimate of forced labour: 
results and methodology” (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2012). 

 2. United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574. 

 3. H. Russell Bernard and others, “Counting hard-to-count populations: the net-
work scale-up method for public health”, Sex Transmitted Infections, vol. 86, No. 2, 
Suppl. (2010), pp. ii11-ii15. 

 4. Peter D. Killworth and others, “Estimation of seroprevalence, rape, and home-
lessness in the United States using a social network approach, Evaluation Review, vol. 
22, No. 2 (1998), pp. 289-308. 

 5. Charles Kadushin and others, “Scale-up methods as applied to estimates of 
heroin use”, Journal of Drug Issues, vol. 36, No. 2 (2006), pp. 417-440. 

 6. Volodymyr Paniotto and others, “Estimating the size of populations with high 
risk for HIV using the network scale-up method: analytical report” (Kiev Interna-
tional Institute of Sociology, 2009). 

 7. Matthew J. Salganik and others, “Assessing network scale-up estimates for 
groups most at risk of HIV/AIDS: evidence from a multiple-method study of heavy 
drug users in Curitiba, Brazil”, vol. 174, No. 10 (2011), pp. 1190-1196. 

 8. Wei Guo and others, “Estimating the size of HIV key affected populations in 
Chongqing, China, using the network scale-up method”, PLoS One, vol. 8, No. 8 (2013). 

 9. Mostafa Shokoohi, Mohammad R. Baneshi and Ali-Akbar Haghdoost, “Size 
estimation of groups at high risk of HIV/AIDS using network scale up in Kerman, 
Iran”, International Journal of Preventive Medicine, vol. 3, No. 7 (2012), pp. 471-476. 

 10. Satoshi Ezoe and others, “Population size estimation of men who have sex with 
men through the network scale-up method in Japan”, PLoS One, vol. 7, No. 1 (2012). 

 11. Tyler H. McCormick, Matthew J. Salganik and Tian Zhen, “How many people 
do you know?: efficiently estimating personal network size”, Journal of the American 
Statistical Association, vol. 105, No. 489 (2010), pp. 59-70. 

 12. Robert M. Groves, Survey Errors and Survey Costs (New York, John Wiley and 
Sons, 2004). 

 13. Tyler H. McCormick and Tian Zheng, “Latent demographic profile estimation in 
hard-to-reach groups”, The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 6, No. 4 (2012), pp. 795-813.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   94 25/06/2015   11:16:57



95

DEVELOPING A SAMPLING FRAME OF POTENTIAL 
TRAFFICKING VICTIMS USING GEO-MAPPING 
TECHNIQUES 

By Kelle Barrick, Wayne J. Pitts, Joseph P. McMichael,  
William D. Wheaton and Brian M. Evans*

Abstract

Given the hidden nature of trafficking in labourers, it is inherently difficult to 
research. Although identifying victims who are currently being exploited may 
be the most effective mechanism for generating estimates of the prevalence of 
trafficking, most research on trafficking in labourers has focused on cases 
known to law enforcement or service providers. To overcome this obstacle 
and generate a prevalence estimate of trafficking in persons for the purpose of 
agricultural labour, a sampling frame of potential victims needs to be con-
structed. This article contains a description of an innovative technique for 
developing a sampling frame of migrant farmworkers using geographical data 
on farming practices to identify where workers may live and employing mobile 
devices to capture digital images and Global Positioning System coordinates 
to serve as a surrogate for a household’s address or description with tradi-
tional field enumeration. Results of a pilot test demonstrate the feasibility and 
efficiency of developing a sampling frame using this technique.

Keywords: labour trafficking; migrant farmworkers; hidden populations; sampling

Background

Human trafficking is a global problem of unknown numbers and unsubstanti-
ated estimates. Among known human trafficking cases, nearly 80 per cent have 
been cases trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation. However, it is sus-
pected that trafficking in labourers is under identified. It is incumbent on 
researchers to develop valid and reliable estimates of the magnitude of the 
problem in order to ensure that appropriate actions are taken by law enforce-
ment agencies and the criminal justice system, as well as to inform the develop-
ment of empirically based mechanisms to prevent trafficking. However, given 
the hidden nature of labour trafficking, it is inherently difficult to research. It is 

* RTI International, North Carolina, United States of America.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   95 25/06/2015   11:16:57



96 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

not surprising, then, that most of the existing research on human trafficking has 
relied on surveys of law enforcement agencies and victim service providers 
about their experiences with trafficking cases and reviews of known cases. 
Those cases are uncovered when an arrest occurs or the victim seeks services. 
However, victims only rarely come to the attention of law enforcement or ser-
vice providers; and when they do, they may not be recognized as trafficking 
victims. Labour trafficking hides within the confines of legitimate employment, 
and law enforcement authorities have relatively little experience with such 
cases. Moreover, the victims who come forward or are otherwise found may not 
be representative of the entire victim population. Thus, looking for labour traf-
ficking cases solely in law enforcement and court files will likely result in the 
majority of labour trafficking incidents being overlooked. This makes it difficult 
to use standard statistical techniques, such as applying a multiplier to the popu-
lation of known victims, in order to estimate the true number and characteris-
tics of victims. Although identifying victims who are currently being exploited 
may be the most effective mechanism for generating estimates of the prevalence 
of trafficking, most research on labour trafficking has focused on cases known 
to law enforcement authorities [1-4]. (For a recent groundbreaking exception 
using respondent-driven sampling, see Zhang [5].) 

Most cases of forced labour involve migrant workers in economic sectors 
where the share of labour in the cost of production is highest and a main 
determinant of competitiveness [6]. One such sector is agriculture. There are 
more than 2.1 million farms in the United States of America, and the market 
value of agricultural products sold in 2012 reached nearly $400 billion [7]. In 
the United States, about 1.2 million labourers work on farms and ranches, 
70  percent of whom are hired directly by the farm operators [8]. North 
 Carolina is one of the leading agricultural states in the United States, and it 
produces a variety of table crops that require extensive manual labour to grow 
and harvest. In 2012, North Carolina had over 50,000 farms, yielding agri-
cultural products with a market value of over $12 billion, including $4.3 bil-
lion from crops [7]. According to the North Carolina Farmworker Institute, 
about 150,000 migrant farmworkers and their dependants work in North 
Carolina, the state with the sixth highest number of migrant farmworkers in 
the United States [8]. The combination of a large agricultural industry and 
reliance on migrant workers makes North Carolina an ideal location to study 
labour trafficking.

In 2013, the authors completed a study that documented the characteristics 
and indicators of labour trafficking in North Carolina [9]. The study was 
funded by the National Institute of Justice (the research, development and eval-
uation agency of the United States Department of Justice). One component of 
this multimethod study was conducting interviews with migrant farmworkers 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   96 25/06/2015   11:16:57



Developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo-mapping techniques 97

who may be at risk for exploitation and trafficking. To ensure a representative 
sample of the population of interest, survey samples are typically drawn from a 
known population of eligible participants; however, there is no such sampling 
frame for migrant farmworkers. In the United States, farms that employ agri-
cultural workers on a temporary visa are required to register; other farms may 
rely on undocumented immigrants and would not be found on a farm registry. 
Some advocacy organizations provide outreach services to workers living at 
some unregistered farms; however, their lists only include labour camps of 
which they are aware, and the lists are admittedly incomplete. Because a sam-
pling frame for migrant farmworkers does not exist, the authors employed vari-
ous techniques for identifying and recruiting a convenience sample of 
respondents. This included reaching out to workers at farmworker festivals, 
visiting labour camps identified through the state registry and outreach organi-
zations and reaching out to farmworkers at other public locations (e.g. laundro-
mats (launderettes), stores frequented by Spanish-speaking customers and bus 
stations). Those techniques enabled the authors to conduct in-person inter-
views with 380 farmworkers during a period of about six months in 2012. The 
interview instrument covered the core measures of trafficking and other forms 
of labour exploitation that had been successfully used in a study of labour traf-
ficking in San Diego, California [5]. 

The results of the study in North Carolina revealed a high level of labour traffick-
ing (25 per cent of respondents) and other forms of labour exploitation that did 
not rise to the level of trafficking (39 per cent) [9]. However, because a conveni-
ence sample was used, these findings may not be representative of all migrant 
farmworkers in North Carolina. To overcome this obstacle and generate an esti-
mate of the prevalence of labour trafficking among all migrant farmworkers in 
the state, a sampling frame of migrant farmworkers would have to be developed. 
In 2013, the authors successfully piloted a method that relies on innovative geo-
mapping techniques to identify farmworker dwellings. The authors are in the 
process of applying this technique to enumerate farmworker dwellings through-
out North Carolina. A sample of dwellings will be drawn from this frame and 
used to recruit a representative sample of migrant farmworkers for participation 
in interviews about labour trafficking and exploitation. The strategy for establish-
ing a sampling frame of migrant farmworkers, as well as the results of the pilot 
project demonstrating its feasibility in the field, is described below. 

Research objectives

The current study seeks to achieve three primary objectives. First, a field-tested 
enumeration strategy will be applied to establish a sampling frame of migrant 
farmworkers. This sampling frame will support the use of multistage sampling 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   97 25/06/2015   11:16:57



98 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

procedures and yield a representative sample of migrant farmworkers in 
North Carolina. Second, a sample of migrant farmworkers will be interviewed 
in order to produce reliable estimates of the prevalence of labour trafficking 
victimization among farmworkers in North Carolina. The authors will adopt 
the core measures that were successfully used in the San Diego study [5] and 
in their own earlier study in North Carolina [9]. In addition to estimating prev-
alence, the authors will be able to produce social and demographic profiles of 
identified victims. Third, the authors will investigate the severity and types of 
victimization that migrant farmworkers endure. The results will inform law 
enforcement agencies and policymakers about the scale and scope of trafficking 
among migrant farmworkers and will result in recommendations for potentially 
effective strategies to combat and prevent trafficking.

Methods

The methods described below are limited primarily to the innovative process 
currently being applied to generate a representative sample of farmworker 
dwellings across North Carolina. The primary steps for developing the sam-
pling frame of migrant farmworkers and selecting a representative sample 
include: using data on agricultural practices to select geographical segments 
to include in the sample, enumerating all dwellings in the selected segments, 
selecting dwellings to include in the household survey, validating the eligibil-
ity of dwellings and selecting individuals within a household to participate. 
Results from a pilot study using methods similar to those described here will 
be presented to demonstrate the feasibility of the sampling and data- collection 
strategies.* Because the collection of data has not begun, prevalence estimates 
for trafficking are not yet available. 

Geographical sample selection

The first step in generating the sampling frame is to identify where farmwork-
ers may live. Resting on the assumption that migrant farmworkers live near 
the farms on which they work, an effort was made to identify areas in North 
Carolina where crops are grown. Because much of the farming in the United 
States is highly mechanized and does not require much manual labour (e.g. 
field corn and soybeans), the authors have focused on “high-labour” (labour-
intensive) crops (e.g. apples, cucumbers, strawberries, tobacco, tomatoes and 

* The strategies used in the pilot study have been refined and technological improvements have 
been made. These changes are expected to result in improved ability to identify and validate 
farmworker dwellings, in addition to easing the enumeration and interview process.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   98 25/06/2015   11:16:57



Developing a sampling frame of potential traffi cking victims using geo-mapping techniques 99

watermelon). The United States Department of Agriculture maintains those 
data at the census block level.*

The map shows the distribution of high-labour crops across North Carolina. 
The map indicates that those crops are produced in various clusters within the 
state and are not evenly distributed. This information is useful as it makes it 
possible to eliminate large areas in the state in which migrant farmworkers are 
not expected to be found because no high-labour crops are produced in those 
areas. Spatial aggregation techniques will be used to divide North Carolina into 
geographical “segments” by joining adjacent census blocks to create areas of a 
size that makes fi eld enumeration feasible. The geographical segments will then 
be aggregated into larger units that will serve as the primary sampling units, 
which will cluster the sites, reducing travel and making enumeration and data 
collection less time-consuming and more cost-effi cient. Probability-propor-
tional-to-size sampling will be used, with land area for high-labour crops as the 
measure of size, to select 20 primary sampling units. From within each of the 
20 primary sampling units, probability-proportional-to-size sampling will again 
be used to select 5-6 segments within each primary sampling unit. Field staff will 
then be dispatched to each selected segment to create a list of dwelling units.

Figure I. Distribution of high-labour crops in North Carolina

* A census block is a statistical area bounded by visible features (e.g. streets, streams, railroad 
tracks) and non-visible boundaries (e.g. property lines, city limits). Census blocks are small in area 
but may be large or irregularly shaped in rural areas. The United States Census Bureau distinguishes 
between census tracts, block groups and blocks. Census block groups are smaller than census tracts 
and can be further divided into census blocks for understanding locations at the lowest aggregate 
level. In the 2010 census, North Carolina had 2,195 tracts, 6,155, block groups and 288,987 blocks 
(www.census.gov/).

Areas of high labour farmland

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   99 25/06/2015   11:16:58



100 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Enumeration of dwellings

The authors developed a method of field enumeration that employs the cap-
ture of digital images with Global Positioning System (GPS) coordinates. In 
short, field staff are deployed to the geographical areas of interest, drive all 
roads (paved and unpaved) and photograph each dwelling they pass. Com-
bined, the digital image and GPS coordinates serve as a surrogate to what 
would be a household’s address or description with traditional field enumera-
tion. This method was introduced in the summer of 2007 for an in-person 
household survey for which a suitable frame could not be generated by tradi-
tional techniques, such as address-based sampling, traditional field enumera-
tion or random digit dialling [10]. Two survey methodologists were deployed 
to the field and enumerated the entire target household population, approxi-
mately 9,000 dwelling units, in five days. 

This method is being updated and adapted for the current project. When 
it was used for the first time, the method relied on the use of a particular 
camera with a GPS receiver to capture photographs of dwellings and GPS 
coordinates. Paper maps were developed for the target area and were used 
to aid in navigation. However, advances in technology allow for a simpler, 
more user-friendly system that will operate entirely on an Android tablet. 
The authors also developed a mobile application for spatial field data col-
lection that will serve as the navigation system, as well as the GPS-enabled 
camera. The application does not require a live Internet connection, which 
makes it particularly useful in rural areas where there may not be consist-
ent cellular service. This application connects with geographic informa-
tion system (GIS) web services to download customer map layers and 
transmit map markups back to the servers. In addition to photographing 
the dwelling, the application will also make it possible to record a code 
indicating the likelihood that a dwelling is a farmworker dwelling (the 
likelihood being high (code 1), medium (code 2) or low (code 3)). The 
mapping application will have three buttons, one for each likelihood code; 
when one of the buttons is clicked, it will take a photograph of a dwelling 
and record the code indicating the likelihood of the dwelling being a farm-
worker dwelling. 

The field team will determine which likelihood code is to be given to a dwell-
ing. The decision will be based on a protocol that describes observations indi-
cating that a dwelling may be a farmworker dwelling. The observation list 
includes community, dwelling, resident and vehicle indicators. The protocol 
was initially developed by a member of the research team who has experience 
engaging in migrant farmworker outreach and was subsequently reviewed by 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   100 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo-mapping techniques 101

local farmworker advocates.* A team of enumerators will be trained on the 
protocol, both in a classroom setting and in the field, to ensure that they inter-
pret it as intended. Teams consisting of one driver and one navigator/photo-
grapher will be dispatched to each segment selected on the basis of the 
geographical distribution of high-labour crops. The photographs and geo-
graphical coordinates will be downloaded from the tablet and will serve as the 
sampling frame.

Validation and selection of eligible dwellings and respondents

Once the sampling frame has been established, a sample of dwellings will be 
selected for approaching and recruiting respondents to participate in in- 
person interviews. Because relatively few dwellings are expected to be given 
the code indicating a high likelihood of being the housing of migrant farm-
workers, all such dwellings will be visited to attempt an interview. A large 
proportion of those dwellings given the code for medium likelihood and a 
small proportion of those given the code for low likelihood will also be visited. 
The proportion of dwellings within each of these strata to be selected will be 
determined after reviewing characteristics of the entire sampling frame. After 
selecting the dwellings, efforts will focus on validating whether the coding 
decision was correct and identifying eligible respondents to recruit for par-
ticipation in the interview. 

Interviewers will make at least three attempts to make contact with residents 
at each selected dwelling. Visits will be made on different days of the week and 
at different times of the day to increase the likelihood of the dwellings being 
occupied. The interviewers will first confirm that the dwelling is occupied by 
migrant farmworkers. If multiple residents are eligible to participate in the 
interviews, one will be randomly selected. The respondents will be read a 
description of the study and what participation in the study entails. If they 
agree to participate, the interviewer will begin conducting the interview. The 
interview instrument will contain the core items from the San Diego labour 
trafficking study [5] and will be used to estimate the prevalence of labour traf-
ficking among migrant farmworkers in North Carolina.

* Although this protocol was developed for a specific geographical and industrial setting, it is 
adaptable to other regions, countries and industries. In this part of the process, the key is the reliance 
on experts to ensure that the protocol used to identify the population of interest is accurate and 
inclusive.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   101 25/06/2015   11:16:58



102 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Research team and other resources needed

Completing the data collection and analysis requires a strong team with 
expertise and research experience in the field of trafficking in persons and 
in sampling hidden populations, sampling statistics and weights, GIS analy-
sis, data analysis and bilingual/bicultural field interviewing. A principal 
investigator and a co-investigator will be responsible for the design and exe-
cution of the study, instrumentation, implementation and other administra-
tive activities. Both have experience conducting research with migrant 
workers who are at risk of being victims of labour trafficking. A sampling 
statistician is systematically developing the geographical segments, ran-
domly selecting segments for inclusion in the study, and generating weights 
for use in the data analysis. The sampling statistician works closely with a 
GIS analyst and a senior GIS expert who are extracting the geographical 
data, making programing adjustments to the mobile application as needed 
to meet project requirements and conducting all other mapping activities. 
Additionally, an experienced data-collection task leader will be responsible 
for executing all fielding activities as designed and planned, including coor-
dinating and supervising the daily activities of field teams. The task leader 
will be supported by field supervisors, who will lead teams of field enumera-
tors and interviewers. Finally, a team of field staff will conduct the enumera-
tion and conduct interviews with the selected participants. All field 
interviewers will be bilingual; most interviews will be conducted in Spanish. 
The enumeration and interview teams will each consist of two or three staff 
members. The number of teams will depend on the geographical distribu-
tion of the selected segments and the time available for conducting inter-
views. If the selected segments are clustered in a few areas in the state, it 
may be feasible for one team to conduct the entire enumeration; however, if 
the segments are dispersed more evenly throughout the state, then two or 
three teams may be needed to cover the state in a timely fashion. The same 
logic holds for the sample of dwellings that will be selected for interviews; 
greater dispersion of dwellings may require additional teams. 

In addition to the research team, this type of data-collection effort requires 
some special equipment and software. Given the rural nature of the areas of 
interest, small sports-utility vehicles will be rented for the fieldwork so that 
the team can easily access unpaved roads. Each field team will also need a 
tablet that is equipped with the mobile mapping application. The research 
team will also need access to other mapping and statistical analysis software. 

The final resource required is time. This project is expected to be completed in a 
total of three years. The first three months of the project are dedicated to getting 
the project set up, which includes finalizing instrumentation, developing field 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   102 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo-mapping techniques 103

protocols and obtaining approval from the institutional review boards to conduct 
research with human subjects. All field staff will also undergo intensive training 
on interviewing techniques, field protocols and procedures for the protection of 
human subjects before data collection may begin. The enumeration will be con-
ducted in year 1 and is expected to be completed in less than one month. Field 
staff will conduct interviews with eligible migrant farmworkers during the grow-
ing season (approximately from May to November) of years 1 and 2. The goal 
will be to complete 400 interviews in two years, averaging about 200 interviews 
each year. Data analysis and reporting will occur in year 3.

Challenges faced in the pilot study

A few challenges were faced in piloting the enumeration strategy for migrant 
farmworkers, and plans are in place to mitigate these as the method is applied 
state-wide. One of the initial challenges in the process is assessing the likeli-
hood that a dwelling is inhabited by migrant farmworkers. In the interest of 
time, these assessments must be made fairly quickly by the members of the 
field team while they are driving and photographing the dwelling. Because the 
assessments are used to determine the probability that a dwelling will be 
revisited for validation and interviewing, it is important to err on the side of 
assuming that a dwelling is more, rather than less, likely to house migrant 
farmworkers. At this stage, it is better to be more inclusive and eliminate ineli-
gible dwellings during the validation process than to exclude a dwelling that 
may be eligible. Developing the protocol for determining the likelihood that a 
dwelling unit may be inhabited by farmworkers and providing adequate train-
ing to field staff are critical in this process.

There were some logistical issues with planning the most efficient driving route 
for enumerating a segment and validating whether each dwelling is eligible. In 
rural areas, census block boundaries frequently follow rivers, levees, ditches or 
other geographical features that are not directly accessible by road. In these situ-
ations, it is necessary to exit a segment and re-enter at another point that is acces-
sible by road. Enumerating every dwelling in a selected segment may require 
driving on the same roads repeatedly and backtracking to ensure that all small 
roads and unpaved roads are included. This can be mitigated by more thorough 
pre-planning of routes by the field team. Additionally, because residents are not 
always at home, it is necessary to make multiple visits to some dwellings in order 
to validate whether they are farmworker dwellings. Plans have been made to con-
duct most of the validation/interview visits in the early evening and on weekends, 
when farmworkers are most likely to be at home. However, the working hours are 
often long and farmworkers may work on weekends as well.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   103 25/06/2015   11:16:58



104 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Finally, conducting the enumeration may generate some negative attention, as 
some residents may want to know why people are driving around photographing 
houses. The enumeration team members must drive slowly in order to photo-
graph each dwelling and make a determination about the likelihood that it is a 
farmworker dwelling. They also must backtrack and drive the same roads repeat-
edly to capture the entire segment. This increases the likelihood that residents 
will notice them and become concerned. The key to overcoming this challenge is 
to train the enumeration team members to expect questions about their presence 
and be prepared to explain their presence and their role in the research project.

Main results of the pilot study

The authors conducted a pilot study of this approach early in 2013. The pur-
pose of the pilot study was to determine whether it was feasible to enumerate 
dwellings in a timely fashion, whether the predictions regarding the likelihood 
of a dwelling being a migrant farmworker dwelling were accurate and whether 
it was a less time-consuming and more cost-effective approach to developing 
a sampling frame. Clusters of census blocks with large areas of high-labour 
crops were purposefully selected for inclusion in the pilot study.

The authors enumerated 542 dwellings in four counties of North Carolina. 
Each dwelling was assigned a code indicating its likelihood of being a farm-
worker dwelling (“almost certainly”, “very likely”, “somewhat likely” or “not 
likely”). Most (85 per cent) of the dwellings were not expected to be farm-
worker dwellings; only 8 per cent were predicted to be very likely or almost 
certainly a migrant farmworker dwelling (see table 1). Return trips were 
attempted to verify whether the coding was accurate. 

Table 1. Field predictions about the likelihood of a dwelling being migrant 
farmworker dwelling

Percentage

Almost certainly eligible 4

Very likely eligible 4

Somewhat likely eligible 7

Not likely eligible 85

After the dwellings were enumerated, the authors returned to each of the 
dwellings that had been initially coded as “almost certainly”, “very likely” or 
“somewhat likely” to be a migrant farmworker dwelling and to a sample of 
20  per cent of the dwellings that had been assessed as “not likely” to be 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   104 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo-mapping techniques 105

migrant farmworker dwellings. The authors then attempted to verify the orig-
inal prediction by visiting each dwelling and asking some basic screening 
questions to confirm that the dwelling was the primary place where a migrant 
farmworker stayed during non-working hours. 

As shown in table 2, the validation results suggest that it was easier to identify 
ineligible than eligible dwellings; this is desirable, as it means that the authors 
will be able to eliminate ineligible dwellings during the validation process and 
can be more confident that all eligible dwellings are included. It was deter-
mined that, of the 90 dwellings coded as “not likely” to be farmworker dwell-
ings, 88 were not farmworker dwellings, 1 actually was a farmworker dwelling 
and 1 was “undetermined”.* Only 44 per cent of the dwellings “very likely” and 
53 per cent of those “almost certainly” to be farmworker dwellings were con-
firmed as farmworker dwellings. The results also suggest that only a small sam-
ple of houses given the code indicating a low likelihood of being farmworker 
dwellings need to be sampled in the full study. There was also a relatively high 
proportion of dwellings for which a determination about eligibility was not 
made. This occurred because residents were not at home during the validation 
visits. The inability to make a determination about some dwellings contributed 
to the low confirmation rates; 30 per cent of the dwellings coded as being “very 
likely” and 16 per cent of those coded as being “almost certainly” farmworker 
dwellings were “undetermined”. This underscores the need to plan for multiple 
return trips to selected segments in order to increase the chances of visiting 
dwellings at a time when the residents are at home. It is anticipated that most 
of this work will occur in the early evening and on weekends.

Table 2. Verification of the predictions about the likelihood of a dwelling being a 
migrant farmworker dwelling 

 
Number of 
dwellings 
sampled

Prediction  
confirmed

Prediction  
not confirmed Undetermined

 f f Percentage f Percentage f Percentage

Almost certainly 
eligible

19 10 52.6 6 31.6 3 15.8

Very likely eligible 23 10 43.5 6 26.1 7 30.4

Might be eligible 33 3 9.1 14 42.4 16 48.5

Not eligible 90 88 97.8 1 1.1 1 1.1

Total 165 111 67.3 27 16.4 27 16.4

* A dwelling was considered “undetermined” if it was unoccupied during the follow-up visits and 
the presence of migrant farmworkers could not be determined.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   105 25/06/2015   11:16:58



106 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Conclusion

Overall, the pilot results demonstrate the feasibility of developing a sampling 
frame of the migrant farmworker population using geographical data on agri-
cultural practices and the newly developed enumeration technique. Several 
advantages and disadvantages of this approach are described below.

Advantages of the approach

One advantage of this approach is it enables researchers to identify victims who 
are currently being exploited rather than relying on databases of cases known to 
law enforcement agencies or service providers. Trafficking cases are under iden-
tified and underreported, which reduces the value of extracting secondary data 
on the few cases that come to light in order to estimate the magnitude of the 
problem. This is more problematic among victims of labour trafficking than 
among victims of trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation, as labourers 
are less likely to come in contact with law enforcement authorities in the course 
of their daily activities than are victims of sex trafficking.* Because victims are 
rarely identified by law enforcement or service providers, they are probably not 
representative of the entire victim population. Research relying on such data 
will overlook most trafficking incidents and run the risk of drawing incorrect 
assumptions about the size or characteristics of the victim population. 

The primary advantage of this strategy over other methods that seek to identify 
hidden populations is that it allows for the recruitment of physically and socially 
isolated populations that may not be reachable through other techniques. For 
example, respondent-driven sampling has been successfully used to estimate 
the prevalence of labour trafficking among undocumented workers in San 
Diego [5]; however, it is best suited for use in smaller geographical areas and 
may not be feasible for nationwide prevalence estimates. Moreover, because it 
relies heavily on the subjects’ immediate social networks, it is difficult to use 
with populations that are socially isolated. The approach presented in this arti-
cle relies on the geographical location of worksites rather than on immediate 
social networks and thus may identify individuals with little or no opportunities 
to socialize with friends and family outside of the work environment.

There are also advantages gained by using geographical data on farming prac-
tices in the sample selection process. A straightforward alternative to the 

* Police officers routinely handle vice cases and may initially arrest a sex trafficking victim who was 
misidentified as a prostitute; victimization may be uncovered after the original arrest. However, labour 
trafficking does not have an analogous criminal activity (i.e. work in jobs that may result in exploitation 
is legal), making it even more difficult to identify the victims of such trafficking.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   106 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Developing a sampling frame of potential trafficking victims using geo-mapping techniques 107

approach presented in this article would be to randomly select census blocks 
for inclusion in the sample. However, using data on crop location improves the 
efficiency of using geographical sampling techniques by eliminating areas that 
are unlikely to include the population of interest. It also improves the precision 
of prevalence estimates over simple random sampling. This approach also 
makes use of technological innovations (e.g. Android-based tablet, mobile 
mapping application) that result in time and cost savings in developing the 
sampling frame and in conducting the interviews. 

Although the focus of the current study is labour trafficking among migrant 
farmworkers in the United States, this framework is flexible and adaptable to dif-
ferent countries, industries, forms of trafficking and hidden populations. The pri-
mary requirement is the existence of geographical data that can be used to narrow 
down where the population of interest may work or live. The case of migrant farm-
workers can be viewed as an example of how the strategy may be used in the field.

Disadvantages of the approach

Although this enumeration strategy has proved useful in examining traffick-
ing among migrant farmworkers, it has a few limitations. One of its primary 
disadvantages involves its reliance on geographical information about the 
industry; it is most useful when geographical characteristics can be used to 
narrow down where the population of interest works and lives. This approach 
also assumes that farmworkers live near the farms on which they work, thus 
excluding those who may live further away and commute to work. Although 
the approach has proved useful in identifying potential trafficking victims in 
the agricultural sector, it may not be particularly useful in identifying victims 
in other industries that are less geographically clustered, such as construction, 
landscaping and domestic help. It is also limited to examining one specific 
industry at a time; the geographical indicators for agriculture will be quite 
different from those for mining or fishing. Other techniques, such as respondent- 
driven sampling, may be more effective when the research focuses on a 
broader population (e.g. experiences of all undocumented migrant workers). 

Another potential disadvantage of this approach relates to the amount of travel 
that may be needed to develop the sampling frame and conduct return trips to 
validate the dwelling type and conduct interviews. In this approach, unlike the 
situation in other approaches, the interviews are not scheduled in advance and 
are not conducted in one location. Instead, the respondents are spread across an 
entire state, and the field interviewer must identify and recruit each respondent and 
conduct the interview during a short period in which the respondent is available. 
Although this can be labour-intensive, the amount of travel required will depend on 
both the geographical size of the area and the ability to identify and recruit 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   107 25/06/2015   11:16:58



108 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

respondents outside of working hours. Proper planning for best days and times to 
conduct fieldwork should help reduce the number of trips to an area that are 
needed to recruit respondents and conduct interviews. In relatively small geo-
graphical areas, such as a city, this should not pose a problem. However, generat-
ing prevalence estimates for larger areas, such as an entire state or country, 
requires more time and money (to meet travel-related costs). However, this may 
be mitigated through the use of online mapping services or similar software to 
virtually “drive” through the selected segments to identify best driving routes and 
potentially eliminate some areas prior to fieldwork. These tools could be used to 
identify areas with no dwellings or high-income subdivisions that would be coded 
as “highly unlikely”.

References

 1. Heather J. Clawson, Nicole Dutch and Megan Cummings, Law Enforcement 
Responses to Human Trafficking and the Implications for Victims: Current Practices and Les-
sons Learned (Fairfax, Virginia, Caliber and ICF International, 2006). 

 2. Heather J. Clawson and others, Prosecuting Human Trafficking Cases: Lessons 
Learned and Promising Practices (Fairfax, Virginia, ICF International, 2008). 

 3. Amy Farrell, Jack McDevitt and Stephanie Fahy, Understanding and Improving 
Law Enforcement Responses to Human Trafficking: Final Report (Boston, Institute on 
Race and Justice, Northeastern University, 2008). 

 4. Phyllis J. Newton, Timothy M. Mulcahy and Susan E. Martin, Finding Victims of 
Human Trafficking (National Opinion Research Center, University of Chicago, 2008). 

 5. Sheldon X. Zhang, Looking for a Hidden Population: Trafficking of Migrant Labourers 
in San Diego County (San Diego, California, San Diego State University, 2012). 

 6. Patrick Belser, “Forced labour and human trafficking: estimating the profits”, 
Working Paper, No. 42 (Geneva, International Labour Office, March 2005).

 7. United States, Department of Agriculture, Census of Agriculture: Preliminary 
Report, 2012 (Washington, D.C., National Agricultural Statistics Service, 2014). 

 8. North Carolina Farmworker Institute, “Introduction to farm work, 2013”. 
Available at: www.ncfarmworkers.org/. 

 9. Kelle Barrick and others, “Indicators of labor trafficking among North Carolina 
migrant farmworkers: final report”, research report prepared for the National Institute 
of Justice of the United States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C., August 2013. 

 10. Joseph P. McMichael and others, “GeoFrame: a technological advancement in 
field enumeration”, presentation made at the Joint Statistical Meetings, Denver, Colo-
rado, 4 August 2008.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   108 25/06/2015   11:16:58



109

ESTIMATING THE SIZE OF HARD-TO-REACH 
POPULATIONS USING CAPTURE-RECAPTURE 
METHODOLOGY, WITH A DISCUSSION OF THE 
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION’S  
GLOBAL ESTIMATE OF FORCED LABOUR*

By Peter G.M. van der Heijden**, Ieke de Vries***,  
Dankmar Böhning**** and Maarten Cruyff*****

Abstract

The authors present an overview of capture-recapture methodology and the 
multiplier method so that researchers interested in estimating the size and 
characteristics of a population in the area of trafficking in persons can have an 
idea of how to approach this problem and what the advantages and draw-
backs of this methodology are. The methodology can be used for the produc-
tion of local estimates as well as national or global estimates. Suggestions are 
made for improving the International Labour Organization’s global estimate 
of forced labour.

Keywords: capture-recapture, population size estimation, multiplier method, hard-to-
reach populations, trafficking in persons, forced labour, homeless, domestic violence

Introduction

Several major international institutions recognize the importance of knowledge 
on the scale and nature of human trafficking and rely on international statistics 
on human trafficking to describe the practice [1-3]. However, there still is a 
scarcity of knowledge on the total scale of human trafficking. Existing estimates 
on the magnitude of human trafficking have been criticized for being based on 
false or unfounded assumptions or for being inaccurate because of insufficient 

* The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the policies 
of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children.

** Utrecht University, the Netherlands, and University of Southampton, United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland.

*** Researcher at the office of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual 
Violence against Children, The Hague, the Netherlands.

**** University of Southampton, United Kingdom.
***** Utrecht University, the Netherlands.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   109 25/06/2015   11:16:58



110 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

and unreliable data and inadequate use of methodologies [4-14].* Estimating 
the total scale of human trafficking is a challenging task.

Among the multitude of challenges in producing estimates, one challenge 
that is related to definitional ambiguity stands out. Despite the internationally 
accepted legal definition of trafficking in persons established in the Protocol 
to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women 
and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Trans-
national Organized Crime [15],** in practice there are a variety of interpreta-
tions of what constitutes human trafficking. Definitional ambiguity plagues 
discussions in research on human trafficking: are all researchers studying the 
same phenomenon? The use of different interpretations of human trafficking 
can make statistical data incomparable and, by extension, complicates inter-
national comparative research based on such data. This challenge has been 
widely referred to in research on human trafficking ([9] p. 93; [11], p. 7; [13], 
pp. 472-474; [16], p. 50-52; [17], pp. 180-184; [18]). 

In this article the authors intend to contribute to a methodological discussion 
on how to obtain more accurate estimates in the area of human trafficking. 
Knowledge on the magnitude of human trafficking is crucial for effective 
 policymaking in terms of, for example, establishing government-sponsored 
countermeasures, planning and assessing anti-trafficking initiatives (both gov-
ernmental and nongovernmental) and determining the most effective funds 
([7], p. 6; [9], p. 111; [14], pp. 67 and 84; [19], p. 2). Yet inaccurate estimates 
may be misleading to anti-trafficking efforts ([14], p. 67; [20]). 

The aim of this article is to give an overview of capture-recapture applications 
so that researchers interested in estimating the size and characteristics of a 
population in the area of human trafficking can obtain an idea of how to 
approach this problem and what the advantages and drawbacks of this meth-
odology are. The people involved in human trafficking situations belong to a 
so-called hard-to-reach population, for which a reliable sampling frame is 
absent, and this hampers representative sampling ([11], p. 2; [13], p. 475; 
[14], pp. 66-68; [16], p. 50; [21], p. 18). In this article, methods are described 

* See also the article by Ieke de Vries and Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen in this volume of Forum 
on Crime and Society.

** “‘Trafficking in persons’ shall mean the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or 
receipt of persons, by means of threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of 
fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving 
of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the 
purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution 
of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar 
to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs” ([15], article 3).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   110 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 111

that can be used to deal with this challenge. As an example, another hard-to-
reach population, the homeless population of Utrecht, a city in the Nether-
lands, is discussed. Three examples are given of how the population size can 
be estimated. First, there is a discussion on a methodology that makes use of 
one single registration (list). The authors recently carried out a study aimed 
at estimating the size of this population and its characteristics. Data were col-
lected for two weeks in a shelter home. For each homeless person appearing 
in the shelter home during the two weeks, the number of days he or she slept 
there were recorded. A total of 231 homeless were observed in the shelter, of 
whom 32 slept there only once, 13 twice and so on. Owing to the design of 
the study, the homeless that did not appear in the shelter home (in other 
words, those who appeared zero times), were missed. The problem was to 
estimate the number of homeless that appeared zero times. Using methods 
discussed in more detail below, in the section entitled “Capture-recapture 
methodology using a single list”, it was estimated that an additional 39 home-
less were part of the homeless population who did not sleep in the shelter 
home. This led to a population size estimate of 270 with a 95 per cent confi-
dence interval of 247-327. 

The second type of methodology, which was not used for Utrecht but for the 
Netherlands as a whole, makes use of multiple registers. Here, three registers 
were used, namely a register of persons who receive social benefits, a police 
register and a register of drug users. In each of these registers, it is indicated 
whether an individual is homeless or not. With three registers, there are in 
principle 23 = 8 combinations possible for an individual to be present or not 
in each of the registers; and for each of these combinations, the number of 
homeless can be counted. The cell that refers to the homeless persons who are 
absent in each of the three registers is empty, as it is not known how many 
homeless are missed by each of the registers. However, there are statistical 
models with which this number can be estimated; and if there is an estimate 
of this number, then it is possible to obtain an estimate of the population size 
by adding up the number of homeless who are seen at least once. 

The third type of methodology is called the multiplier method. There is a list 
of homeless persons who receive benefits; there are, say, 240 homeless per-
sons on the list. Yet the number of homeless who do not receive benefits is not 
known. Locations frequented by homeless persons, such as shelter homes, 
general practitioners’ offices and centres for drug users are visited and the 
homeless persons there are asked whether they receive benefits or not. If, for 
example, 60 per cent of those homeless people say that they receive benefits 
and 40 per cent do not, then 240 corresponds to these 60 per cent and it fol-
lows that the estimate of homeless who do not receive benefits is 160; thus, 
the estimate of the size of the total population is 400.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   111 25/06/2015   11:16:58



112 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

The capture-recapture methodology is one of the viable methods that could 
be used for producing local estimates of human trafficking. The sections that 
follow contain descriptions of how the capture-recapture methodology can 
be applied by using multiple sources, by using a single list and by using the 
so-called multiplier method. Then there is a section containing a discussion 
of how the International Labour Organization (ILO) applied the capture-
recapture methodology in order to reach a global estimate of the total num-
ber of victims of forced labour.* Some suggestions for improving the ILO 
estimate are provided. The last section in the article contains some practical 
notes for applying the capture-recapture methodology in research on human 
trafficking. 

Capture-recapture methodology using multiple sources

A well-known method for estimating the population size of human populations 
makes use of linked lists of individuals. The following is a hypothetical example 
involving prostitutes in a big city:** In the month of January 2014, the police 
went to the prostitution areas in the city and they registered 400 prostitutes. 
In the same month, public health officials kept a register of the prostitutes who 
were treated, and they registered 125 prostitutes. Using official papers, names, 
dates of birth and so on, it was possible to find an overlap of 100 prostitutes. 
That would then yield the data shown in table 1.

Table 1. Hypothetical example showing observed numbers of prostitutes 
 registered by police and public health officials

Registered by public health officials 

Registered by police Yes No Total

Yes 100 300 400

No 25    

Total 125    

* ILO estimated that there were 20.9 million victims of forced labour at any given moment in the 
period 2002-2011, with a confidence interval of 68 per cent ([3], p. 13).

** Note that this hypothetical example does not necessarily refer to human trafficking. In some 
countries (e.g. the Netherlands), prostitution is not always considered to be human trafficking. In 
other countries, moral attitudes dictate that prostitution is, by definition, regarded as human 
trafficking. Regardless of the discussion on whether there is a causal link between the prostitution 
policy and the magnitude of human trafficking, the different interpretations of what constitutes 
human trafficking need to be taken into account when measuring the magnitude of the practice (see 
the report of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against 
Children [9], p. 93; see also the article by Ieke de Vries and Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen in this 
volume of Forum on Crime and Society)

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   112 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 113

Thus, a total of 425 prostitutes were registered. The problem is to estimate 
the unknown number of prostitutes, those missed by the police and by the 
public health officials. This unknown number refers to the empty (“No/No”) 
cell in table 1. If this number is estimated, then adding the estimate to the 
observed number of prostitutes (425) will yield an estimate of the size of the 
population of prostitutes in the city in January 2014. 

A standard approach to making such an estimate is to assume that, for the pros-
titutes in the police register and for the prostitutes not in the police register, the 
proportions seen by the public health officers are identical. In other words, in 
both the “Yes” row and the “No” row of table 1, this proportion is 0.25. For the 
“Yes” row this proportion is derived from 100/400. For the “No” row there is 
only the numerator 25, and it follows that the denominator should be 100, as 
25/100 = 0.25. The missing number in the table for the empty (“No/No”) cell 
is 75, and this yields a population size estimate of 500 (see table 2). (For more 
examples, see Bishop, Fienberg and Holland [22], International Working 
Group for Disease Monitoring and Forecasting [23], Chao and others [24] and 
van der Heijden and others [25]).

Table 2. Hypothetical example showing observed and estimated numbers of 
prostitutes registered by police and public health officials

Registered by public health officials 

Registered by police Yes No Total

Yes 100 300 400

No 25 75  100 

Total 125  375 500 

Note: Estimated numbers are in italics. Data are hypothetical.

The assumptions of this estimation procedure are discussed in some detail 
below. 

Independence of inclusion probabilities

A first assumption is that the inclusion probability of one list is statistically 
independent from the inclusion probability of the other list. For table 2, the 
estimated inclusion probabilities are 400/500 = 0.80 for the police register 
and 125/500 = 0.25 for the public health register. In human populations, 
independence of inclusion probabilities is often unlikely. Typically in popula-
tion size estimation, it is likely that some humans are more visible than others 
and therefore the more visible humans will have higher inclusion probabilities 
in both registers and the less visible humans will have lower inclusion proba-
bilities. An example of this is given below.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   113 25/06/2015   11:16:58



114 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Table 3. Hypothetical example showing observed numbers of prostitutes registered 
by police and public health officials, subdivided into more and less visible prostitutes

More visible prostitutes Registered by public health officials 

Registered by police Yes No Total

Yes 75 75 150

No 10 10  20 

Total 85 85  170 

Less visible prostitutes

Registered by police Yes No Total

Yes 25 225 250

No 15 135  150 

Total 40 360  400 

Note: Estimated numbers are in italics. Data are hypothetical.

Whereas in tables 1 and 2 the inclusion probabilities are 0.80 and 0.25, in 
table 3 the more visible prostitutes have inclusion probabilities 150/170 = 0.88 
(police) and 85/170 = 0.50 (public health officials); for the less visible prosti-
tutes, the inclusion probabilities are 250/400 = 0.63 (police) and 40/400 = 0.10 
(public health officials). The observed numbers in table 3 add up to the observed 
numbers in table 1, but the estimated numbers do not add up: in table 3, by 
assuming independence of the inclusion probabilities, it is estimated that only 
10 more visible prostitutes were missed by both the police and the public health 
officials whereas 135 fewer visible prostitutes are missed. These two numbers 
add up to an estimated number of 145, whereas in table 2 it is estimated that 
only 75 prostitutes were missed by both registers. This shows what happens 
under violation of the assumption of independence of inclusion probabilities: 
when the inclusion probabilities are positively related, then, if information on 
visibility is not used, the estimate in table 2 will be too low (i.e. in table 2 it is 
75 but it should have been 145). When the inclusion probabilities are negatively 
related, then the estimate in table 2 will be too high.

Inclusion probabilities can also be negatively related. Consider again the home-
less as a hard-to-reach population. Assume that there are two locations in a city 
where they can sleep. Then some homeless may have a preference for being at 
the first location (so the inclusion probability is higher for location 1 and lower 
for location 2) whereas other homeless persons may have a preference for being 
at the second location.

This independence assumption is sometimes misunderstood: it appears that 
sometimes people think that “the independence assumption” for the inclusion 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   114 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 115

probabilities is fulfilled if the lists are constructed independently, for example 
because they are constructed by different organizations or (groups of) people. 
However, the independence assumption refers to independence of inclusion 
probabilities, not the independent construction of lists.*

It is clear that the independence assumption is restrictive and violation of the 
assumption may result in a large bias (for sensitivity analyses to quantify this 
bias, see Gerritse, van der Heijden and Bakker [26]). One way to get around 
this independence assumption is by including a third list. So-called loglinear 
models may be used that allow for pairwise dependence of lists, and the 
remaining assumption is that there is no so-called three-factor interaction. An 
example of three-factor interaction is that the relation between a pair of lists 
is different for those who are included in the third list compared with those 
who are not included in the third list. However, it regularly happens that it is 
impossible to find a third list that can be linked to two other lists.

Homogeneity of inclusion probabilities

It is often stated that an assumption underlying the calculation in table 2 is 
that each of the inclusion probabilities is homogeneous—that is, the individu-
als have the same inclusion probability for the first list and the individuals 
have the same inclusion probability for the second list.** However, this state-
ment is incorrect, and the actual assumption made is much less restrictive. 
Consider the following three situations:

(a) If there is a covariate that is related to the inclusion probabilities to 
be on one list (i.e. for list one, the inclusion probabilities are not homogene-
ous but) and also related to the inclusion probabilities on the other list, this 
covariate does influence the population size estimate. An example was pro-
vided for table 3, where visibility was related both to the inclusion probabili-
ties of the police register and to the list generated by the public health 
officials;

(b) However, if there is a covariate that is related to the inclusion proba-
bilities to be on one list but not to the inclusion probabilities on the other, this 

* As an example, in a recent ILO report [3], there are two teams of people collecting reported cases 
of forced labour. It would be incorrect to assume that inclusion probabilities for the two lists generated 
by each of the teams are statistically independent.

** See, for, example, a recent ILO report ([3], p. 24): “According to this model, a forced labour 
report is either ‘captured’ or ‘not captured’ by a given team with respective probabilities p and 1 – p. 
The values of p are the same for all reports but may differ between the teams, say p = p1 for team 1 
and p = p2 for team 2.”

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   115 25/06/2015   11:16:58



116 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

covariate does not influence the population size estimate (see Chao and others 
[24], van der Heijden and others [25] and Zwane, van der Pal-de Bruin and 
van der Heijden [27]);

(c) If there are two covariates, where one is related to the inclusion 
probability to be on the first list and the second is related to the inclusion 
probability to be on the second list, yet the two covariates are statistically 
independent, then these covariates do not influence the population size esti-
mate (see van der Heijden and others [25]).

Even though the homogeneity assumption is more complicated than simply 
saying that inclusion probabilities should be homogeneous, ignoring the het-
erogeneity in the first situation may lead to serious errors in the population 
size estimate, as seen in table 3. However, errors like these can be circum-
vented by including such covariates into the calculations. This can be done by 
making use of so-called loglinear models (see, for example, Bishop, Fienberg 
and Holland [22], International Working Group for Disease Monitoring and 
Forecasting [23] and van der Heijden and others [25]). In fact, a basic exam-
ple is shown in table 3, where the covariate visibility can be included into the 
model by simply making separate calculations for more and less visible pros-
titutes and then adding the estimated numbers.

The population is closed

A further assumption is that the population is closed. Closeness means that 
there are no individuals entering or leaving the population. There are models 
proposed for open populations but these models need much more detailed data 
than the data that are discussed here (see the Cormack-Jolly-Seber model, 
described in Pledger, Pollock and Norris [28]). 

If openness of the population may be a problem, the extent of this problem 
can be lowered by limiting the period of observation. In a shorter period, 
there will be fewer individuals entering or leaving the population than in a 
larger period. For example, for studies on homelessness (see the introduc-
tion of this article), the homeless are only observed for a period of two 
weeks, because over a longer period new homeless persons may enter the 
homeless population or some homeless persons may find a home or leave 
the region, thereby leaving the population. However, the cost of choosing a 
shorter period of observation is that the overlap between lists will become 
smaller, which will yield population size estimates that have relatively larger 
confidence intervals.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   116 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 117

Correct linkage

A last assumption is that it is possible to link two lists correctly, that there are 
no missed links or incorrect links. In table 2, one missed link would have 
changed the counts 100, 300 and 25 and the estimated 75 to 99, 301 and 26, 
and an estimated 79. So, for this example, one missed link would lead to an 
increase of 5 in the population size. If a similar calculation is made for an 
incorrect link, then the counts would become 101, 299 and 24 and an esti-
mated 71, leading to a decrease of 5. Much more about linking and space 
limitations can be found by searching in the literature under the term “record 
linkage” (see also Herzog, Scheuren and Winkler [29]).

Some design considerations

There are a few design issues that may be taken into account when setting 
up a population size estimation study along the lines of linking two or more 
data sources:

 (a) If possible, strive for using more than two lists. The reason is 
that under two lists the unrealistic assumption has to be made that inclusion 
in one list is independent of inclusion in another list, and in human popula-
tions this is a heroic assumption;

 (b) If possible, include covariates in the analysis, in particular covari-
ates that are related to inclusion probabilities. Even though technically the 
assumption is a complicated one, as discussed above, it is clear that in general 
by including covariates the model allows for heterogeneity of inclusion proba-
bilities and this makes the model (and the resulting estimates) more realistic;

 (c) If possible (and relevant), make the period of observation short, 
so that the problem of an open population is smaller. Strive for a balance 
because if the period is too short, there will not be enough overlap between 
the lists, and this will lead to relatively large confidence intervals. In other 
words, it is a problem of bias versus variance;

 (d) In record linking of individuals or cases, if decisions have to be 
taken that may be partly incorrect, create multiple data sets that reflect differ-
ent decisions that could have been taken and analyse them separately. This 
will then show the sensitivity of the outcomes of the analysis for the choices 
that can be taken. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   117 25/06/2015   11:16:58



118 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

A last suggestion is to consider whether it is necessary to make use of existing 
lists or whether it is possible to create lists. Examples in the literature are esti-
mating the size of the web using lists created by search machines [30] and 
searches for scientific literature to come to an estimate of the number of studies 
missed [31]. This last option was also chosen by ILO [3], which made use of 
two teams that each created a list of cases of trafficking in persons. 

Capture-recapture methodology using a single list

The methodology presented in this section makes use of a single list. This list 
may be an existing register, such as a police register or a register of homeless 
people, or it may be data collected especially for the purpose of estimating the 
size and characteristics of a population, as in the ILO report [3]. Estimation 
based on a single list may have important advantages: first, it does not require 
the unverifiable assumption that inclusion in one list is statistically independ-
ent from inclusion in the second list; and, second, it does not require the 
elaborate process of database linkage that may be troubled by privacy regula-
tions. Also, there is not always sufficient reliable information to be certain that 
all linkages made are correct and that there are no linkages missed. A single 
list that contains (re)captures circumvents these problems. The methodology 
also has a drawback: the assumptions that the models make are not always 
fulfilled (see below). 

One example of a single list that can be used for population size estimation 
involves data on victims of domestic violence in the register system of the 
police in the Netherlands. The police show every contact related to domes-
tic violence. Thus, a list of victims can be constructed including a variable 
that denotes the number of times each victim was recorded in the police 
register system, with values 1, 2, 3 and so on. Victims who did not have con-
tact with the police are not part of this victim-based data set. Yet, if their 
number is estimated, this would yield an estimate of the total number of 
victims of domestic violence (for a review of the literature, see van der 
 Heijden, Cruyff and Böhning [32]). The list of victims can be used for this 
purpose. Some principles that play a role in such an estimation are dis-
cussed below.

It is important to note that a single list may also be derived from a multiple 
list database. That is what happened in the ILO report [3] that is discussed in 
more detail in a separate section below. Consider table 1 discussed in the 
previous section. If the researcher ignores in which register a case has been 
found, then there are cases seen in only one list and cases seen in two lists. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   118 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 119

Thus, a list of cases can be set up where every case has a count of 1 or 2, 
depending on how many of the two original lists the case has been seen. For 
table 1, these numbers would be 325 (seen once) and 100 (seen twice).

Poisson distribution

In the example of victims of domestic violence, the aim is to estimate the 
number of victims who never came in contact with the police, using the data 
about victims who saw the police at least once. These estimates are derived 
using Poisson distributions. The Poisson distribution is characterized by a 
Poisson parameter denoted by λ. The parameter λ expresses the probability of 
a given number of events (i.e. the count) under two assumptions: 

 (a) That events occur with an average rate in a fixed interval of time;

 (b) That events occur independently of the time since the last event. 

The probability that count Y, generated by a Poisson distribution with Poisson 
parameter λ, is equal to j (j = 0, 1, 2,…) is:

 (1)

Two arbitrary examples of a Poisson distribution are provided in table 4. In 
the first example an individual has a Poisson parameter λ = 0.5. Then the 
probability of the individual being seen zero times is 0.607, being seen once 
is 0.303, being seen twice is 0.076 and so on. These probabilities add up to 1 
(see table 4, row 1). In the second example it is assumed that there is an indi-
vidual with Poisson parameter λ = 1. The probability of that individual not 
being seen is 0.368, the probability of him or her being seen once is 0.368, 
being seen twice is 0.184 and so on (see table 4, row 2). Note that the indi-
vidual with Poisson parameter λ = 1 has a larger probability of being seen at 
least once, namely (1 – 0.368) = 0.632, whereas the probability of the indi-
vidual with Poisson parameter λ = 0.5 being seen is only (1 – 0.607) = 0.393. 
It follows that the individual with Poisson parameter λ = 1 has a larger prob-
ability of being seen. 

 𝑝𝑝𝑖𝑖 = 𝑃𝑃(𝑌𝑌 = 𝑖𝑖) =  
𝑒𝑒−𝜆𝜆𝜆𝜆𝑖𝑖

𝑖𝑖!
 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   119 25/06/2015   11:16:58



120 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Table 4. Two examples of Poisson distributions (rows 1 and 2) and their 
 corresponding truncated Poisson distributions (rows 3 and 4) 

Number of times an individual is seen

Row
Poisson  
parameter 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 Total

1 λ = 0.5 0.607 0.303 0.076 0.013 0.002 0.000 0.000 1.000

2 λ = 1 0.368 0.368 0.184 0.061 0.015 0.003 0.001 1.000

3 λ = 0.5 – 0.771 0.193 0.032 0.004 0.000 0.000 1.000

4 λ = 1 – 0.582 0.291 0.097 0.024 0.005 0.001 1.000

Note: The entries show the probability.

How do these Poisson distributions allow an estimate to be made of the size 
of the population? Assume that there is a count distribution with numbers 
of victims seen once, seen twice and so on. There is no count for the number 
of victims seen zero times, as this count is unknown and has to be estimated. 
This is called a truncated count distribution. A basic model is introduced 
that (usually unrealistically) assumes that all victims have the same Poisson 
parameter, and a truncated probability distribution is fitted to the truncated 
count distribution. Examples of the truncated probability distributions for 
λ = 1 and λ = 0.5 are shown in rows 3 and 4 of table 4. They are derived by 
dividing the probabilities in rows 1 and 2 of table 4 by the probability of 
being seen at least once, i.e. by (1 – 0.607) and by (1 – 0.368). Fitting a 
truncated Poisson distribution to a truncated count distribution gives an 
estimated Poisson parameter. 

As a hypothetical example, assume that that there is a list of 100 victims, 
where f1 = 77 victims have been seen once, f2 = 20 victims have been seen 
twice and f3 = 3 victims have been seen three times, then the estimated Pois-
son parameter will be approximately 0.5 (the number of victims seen once, 
twice and three times were generated by multiplying by 100 the probability 
entries in row 3 of table 4). When the Poisson parameter is 0.5, the 100 vic-
tims who have been seen correspond to 0.303 of the population (see table 4, 
row 1), so approximately 30 out of every 100 victims in the population have 
been seen. This means that, when 100 victims have been seen, the estimated 
total number of victims is 100/0.303 = 330. Thus an estimate can be made of 
the size of the population of victims.

Van der Heijden and others [33] discuss the assumption underlying the use 
of a Poisson distribution to model human behaviour in some detail. To 
summarize:

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   120 25/06/2015   11:16:58



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 121

 (a) A Poisson distribution for an individual is reasonable if there is 
constant probability of an event (e.g. a police contact) occurring; 

 (b) An individual’s count still follows a Poisson distribution, even if 
the individual’s Poisson parameter has changed during the period of observa-
tion. It follows for the type of applications being discussed that victims do not 
need to have a constant probability to see the police, but it suffices if they can 
see the police a number of times. In this sense the use of a Poisson distribu-
tion is not restrictive; 

 (c) One restrictive feature, however, is that the Poisson assumption 
is only valid if a change in the individual Poisson parameter of a victim is 
unrelated to any prior police contact or non-contact. This assumption is vio-
lated if, for example, an event makes the next event more likely or less likely. 
For example, a visit by the police may influence the behaviour of a perpetrator 
so that he or she becomes less violent; but the victim may contact the police 
more easily after a first successful visit by the police;

 (d) The assumption of a closed population has to be made. This 
assumption is usually tackled by observing events for a limited amount of 
time, similar to the approach taken for multiple lists (see the previous section 
of this article).

Extensions of the basic model

So far, the Poisson distribution has been fitted to data assuming that all victims 
have an identical Poisson parameter. This is referred to as the homogeneity 
assumption. In most applications where humans are involved, this assumption 
is very unlikely to hold. For example, some victims are expected to have 
higher probability (resulting from higher Poisson parameters) of seeing the 
police than other victims. If this is the case, there is heterogeneity of Poisson 
parameters. 

If the Poisson parameters are heterogeneous but this heterogeneity is ignored 
by fitting a homogeneous Poisson model, the estimated population size will 
be too low (see van der Heijden and others [34]). There are two ways to take 
heterogeneity into account. One way is to include covariate information in the 
model, such as age, marital status and so on. This is done by using a regres-
sion model, where the Poisson parameter is a function of covariates. In the 
regression model, the Poisson parameters are still assumed to be homogene-
ous for individuals with identical values on the covariates, but they are allowed 
to be heterogeneous for individuals with different values. Since here the 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   121 25/06/2015   11:16:58



122 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

differences in Poisson parameters are determined by the observed covariates; 
this is referred to as “observed heterogeneity”. The resulting model is known 
as the truncated Poisson regression model ([33], [34]).

If, in addition to observed heterogeneity, there are differences in the Poisson 
parameters that cannot be explained by the observed covariates (referred to 
as “unobserved heterogeneity”), then an extension of the truncated Poisson 
regression model known as the truncated negative binomial regression model 
can be used [35].

A second way to deal with heterogeneity is to use only the lower counts of the 
distribution. This approaches gives special emphasis to the number of victims 
seen once and twice. This approach is quite popular in estimates of drug-
using populations (see van Hest and others [36]), and it is also used in the 
ILO report [3]. Two attractive features of this approach are that heterogeneity 
of Poisson parameters that is revealed in victims seen more than twice does 
not play a role in the estimation of the population size and thus it leads to 
estimates that are robust. A second important attractive feature of these mod-
els is that the victims missed (i.e. the victims with a count of zero) are likely 
to be more similar to the victims not often seen (i.e. those seen once or twice) 
than to the victims seen more than twice, and therefore it makes sense to use 
only counts for victims seen once or twice.

A first model that only makes use of the lower counts of a distribution is the 
model originally proposed by Zelterman [37]. He estimates the Poisson 
parameter λ using only the first two frequencies f1 and f2 by:

This estimate of parameter λ can then be used to estimate the population size 
as NZ = n / (1 – exp(-λ)). This estimator is also mentioned in the ILO report 
([3], p. 25). 

The authors have extended the Zelterman estimator so that it can take covari-
ates into account [38]. In this extension, the estimated Poisson parameter is a 
function of covariates. Thus, the resulting Zelterman regression model is able 
to take observed heterogeneity into account that is present in victims with a 
count of 1 or 2, and it is robust against violations of the homogeneous Poisson 
distributions in counts higher than 2.

�̂�𝜆 =  
2𝑓𝑓2
𝑓𝑓1

 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   122 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 123

A closely related estimator that is also used is the Chao estimator [39]: 

NC = n + f1
2/(2f2)

The Chao estimator and the Zelterman estimator are used for similar purposes. 
The Chao estimator has the important property that, if the data are generated 
by a homogeneous Poisson distribution, the estimator Nc is unbiased; but when 
there is heterogeneity then Nc is to be interpreted as a lower bound for the 
population size. So, for example, if the Chao estimator provides an estimate of 
2,000, then the population size will be larger than 2,000, where the discrepancy 
will be larger under larger heterogeneity. Also, often the Chao estimator and the 
Zelterman estimator are very close, although under certain circumstances the 
latter can experience strong overestimation bias [40]. Recently, Böhning and 
others [41] extended the Chao estimator so that it can take covariates into 
account. They show that, as covariates take (part of the) heterogeneity into 
account, the lower bound provided by the Chao regression estimator will be 
higher than the lower bound when no covariates are taken into account. Hence 
the lower bound will also get closer to the true population size.

Conclusion

The methodology yields the following results: (a) an estimated population size, 
and a 95 per cent confidence interval; (b) an estimated number of unseen vic-
tims; (c) if a regression model is used, a distribution of this unseen number over 
covariates; and (d) insight into which part of the estimated population size is 
visible in the register and which part is missed, stratified by the levels of the 
covariates. 

There is a reasonable amount of experience with these models, but their 
development is more recent than the models for multiple lists discussed in the 
previous section. As indicated above, the Chao estimator was used in the ILO 
study [3]; both the Chao estimator and the Zelterman estimator were used in 
Hest and others [36]. The authors of this article have made ample use of 
regression models in contract research for the Government of the Nether-
lands on subjects such as domestic violence (using police data to estimate the 
number and characteristics of victims and perpetrators of domestic violence) 
[32], undocumented aliens (using police data) ([34], [38]), homeless persons 
(using shelter data), illegal gun ownership (using police data) [33], drunk 
driving (using police data) [33] and drug users (using hospital data) [42].

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   123 25/06/2015   11:16:59



124 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Multiplier method

The multiplier method is another method used to estimate the size of a popu-
lation. It is closely related to capture-recapture methodology that makes use 
of two lists (see the section in this article entitled “Capture-recapture meth-
odology using multiple sources”). Multiplier methods are user-friendly, 
known for their mathematical simplicity and the absence of linkage, and their 
use is straightforward in the sense that calculations are easily made (although 
it takes more time to derive the correct confidence interval of the estimate). 
At least two data sources are needed to use the multiplier method, usually a 
comprehensive register (that may already exist or is prepared specifically for 
the purpose of coming to a population size estimate) and a survey. 

For example, to estimate the number of undocumented prostitutes in a city, 
it is assumed that the city has an official register of documented prostitutes 
working in the city and that the register lists 400 prostitutes. It is also assumed 
that it is possible to take a random sample of the population of documented 
and undocumented prostitutes in the city. If the sample size is, say, 100, and 
80 of the prostitutes in the sample are documented and 20 are undocumented, 
then the 80 correspond with the 400 prostitutes in the register and 20 corre-
sponds to an unknown number u, i.e. 80/400 = 20/u. It follows that the esti-
mated number of undocumented prostitutes is (20/80) × 400 = 100. The 
estimated total number of prostitutes is then 400 + 100 = 500. So the idea of 
the multiplier method is that the number of prostitutes in the register (400) is 
multiplied by the multiplier (20/80 = 1/4) and this yields the number of 
undocumented prostitutes. 

Table 5. Hypothetical example showing the relation of the multiplier method 
with capture-recapture methodology using two lists

    Number in the sample

Number in the register Yes No Total

Yes 80 320 400

No 20 80 100

Total 100 400 500

Note: Estimated numbers are in italics.

The close relation with two-source capture-recapture methodology becomes 
apparent when the data are displayed as in table 5. In this set-up, the italic 
numbers are not provided. The number in the “No/No” cell (80) is estimated. 
The set-up in table 5 is identical to the set-up in a table for two-source  capture- 
recapture methodology. The size of the confidence interval for 500 is depend-
ent on, first, the stability of the multiplier (20/80). In this case, the multiplier 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   124 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 125

is based on 100 observations, but the number of observations becomes larger, 
and then its stability becomes larger and hence the estimate of 500 becomes 
more stable and has a smaller confidence interval. And second, the size of the 
confidence interval depends on the size of the multiplier: the smaller the mul-
tiplier, the lower the total number not in the register (currently corresponding 
to 100) will be. 

The attractiveness of the multiplier method lies in the absence of linkage of  
two sources. When estimating hidden or hard-to-reach populations, it is prob-
ably difficult to obtain identifying variables to link the individuals in the sam-
ple to the register. The absence of linkage is what makes the multiplier method 
different from capture-recapture methodology. However, the above example 
shows that the multiplier method also relies on the underlying assumption 
that the proportion of registered prostitutes in the sample is identical to the 
proportion of non-registered prostitutes in the sample.

The multiplier method is regularly used in research on the prevalence of drug 
use and HIV ([43], [44]). It is also used in the ILO study [3], discussed in the 
next section. In Italy, it is used to estimate the size of communities of undocu-
mented aliens: for example, the number of documented people from Algeria 
in a town is known from the town register. Then locations are visited where 
Algerians meet and a multiplier is derived by asking those Algerians whether 
they have official documentation or not. Thus an estimate of the size of the 
community’s population can be derived.

International Labour Organization estimate of 2012

Now that multiple-source capture-recapture methodology, single-source  
capture-recapture methodology and the multiplier method have been dis-
cussed, the recent ILO global estimate of forced labour [3] can be discussed. 
ILO presented an estimate of 20.9 million victims of forced labour (an esti-
mate with a 68 per cent confidence interval of 19.5 million-22.3 million) at 
any given moment in the period 2002-2011. Although the definition of forced 
labour used by ILO corresponds for a the most part to the definition of traf-
ficking in persons in article 3 of the Trafficking in Persons Protocol, the ILO 
estimate of victims of forced labour is not exactly the same as an estimate of 
the total number of trafficked persons ([2], p. 68; [3], pp. 19-20).*

* The ILO definition of forced labour refers to “all work or service which is exacted from any 
person under the menace of any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself 
voluntarily”. The term forced labour encompasses trafficking in persons as defined in the Trafficking 
in Persons Protocol and similar practices such as slavery, practices similar to slavery, debt bondage 
and serfdom. One major difference is that human trafficking for the purpose of organ removal falls 
under the definition of trafficking in persons in the Protocol but not under the ILO definition of 
forced labour ([3], pp. 19-20; [9], pp. 26-27).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   125 25/06/2015   11:16:59



126 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

The ILO approach has three steps. In the first step, a capture-recapture esti-
mate of reported cases of forced labour is found and that estimate is used to 
find the number of reported victims of forced labour. In the second step, the 
stock of forced labour is estimated by taking into account the duration of 
exploitation as recorded in the database ([3], p. 360). In the third step, the 
number of unreported cases of forced labour is estimated using the multiplier 
method. In the present article, the focus is on capture-recapture methodology 
and the multiplier method and therefore only the first and third steps of the 
estimation procedure are commented on. (For further discussion of the ILO 
estimate, see, for example, National Rapporteur ([9], pp. 26-30) and United 
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime ([2], p. 68); for a general discussion on 
estimates of human trafficking, see De Cock [4], Farrell and others [5], 
Goodey [6], Gould [7], Goździak and Collett [8], National Rapporteur [9], 
O’Brien [10], Tyldum [11], Zhang [13] and Zhang and others [14]).* 

Interestingly, in the capture-recapture approach, ILO starts by collecting data 
for use in two-source capture-recapture methodology that are then trans-
formed into data for use in single-source capture-recapture methodology, in 
order to arrive at estimates of the number of reported cases and victims of 
forced labour. At the end, the multiplier method is used to estimate the num-
ber of unreported victims of forced labour. Thus the ILO report brings 
together nicely the previous three sections of this article. Below is a summary 
of the ILO research, followed by some suggestions for future research.

Data collection

In the ILO research, the unit of analysis is a reported case. The case repre-
sents a “recorded piece of information” ([3], p. 21) and it may involve one or 
more persons who are currently, or have been, victims of forced labour during 
the reference period ([3], p. 21). So data were collected on cases found in 
media reports, official sources, NGOs, academic reports, trade union reports 
and so on (for details, see the ILO research ([3], p. 29)). The data were inde-
pendently collected by two teams, each composed of four graduate research 
assistants of different nationalities. The teams collected reported cases for 
13 consecutive weeks and were based in ILO headquarters in Geneva. Thus 
team 1 produced a list of cases and team 2 produced a list of cases. By linking 
the cases found by team 1 to the cases found by team 2, a 2 x 2 contingency 
table could be constructed, with cases found by both teams, cases found by 
team 1 but not by team 2, and cases found by team 2 but not by team 1. These 
three counts added up to 5,491 reported cases found by at least one team. 

* See also the article by Ieke de Vries and Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen in this volume of Forum 
on Crime and Society.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   126 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 127

The number of reported cases missed both by team 1 and by team 2 was 
unknown and had to be estimated. As a last step, the number of unreported 
cases was also estimated.

Assumptions and data analysis

The two-list estimate for the 2 x 2 table is likely to be biased because it 
assumes that the probability that a reported case is found by team 1 is inde-
pendent of the probability that a case is found by team 2 (see the discussion 
in the section of this article entitled “Capture-recapture methodology using 
multiple sources”). This assumption will be violated for the obvious reason 
that some cases can be found more easily and then they are likely to be found 
by both teams, and other cases are less likely to be found, and then they will 
be found more often by only one team or by none of the teams. Thus the 
probability that a reported case is found by team 1 will be correlated to the 
probability that it is found by team 2. 

For this reason, the ILO researchers transformed the two-source data into  
single-source data, by counting the number of times that a reported case was 
found (i.e. once, twice and so on). Here a case could be found multiple times 
by each of the teams (i.e. duplicates in a team were not removed). Thus the 
estimation problem changed from an estimation problem under multiple-
source capture-recapture methodology (see the section in this article entitled 
“Capture-recapture methodology using multiple sources”) to single-source 
capture-recapture methodology (see the section entitled “Capture-recapture 
methodology using a single list”). The 5,491 reported cases found consisted 
of 4,069 cases found only once and 1,422 cases found more than once. Using 
the observed count distribution, the number of reported cases missed was 
then estimated using the Chao estimator (see the section entitled “Capture-
recapture methodology using a single list”). This was done separately for so-
called incidents and aggregates (for details, see the ILO report [3]). In the 
estimation, incidents were further split into “strata”, according to the geo-
graphical region and form of forced labour (no details were provided on how 
this was done, but it is assumed that a separate estimate was made for each 
combination of a region and form of forced labour).

A complication to the simple capture-recapture problem is that each reported 
case possibly involved more than one victim. This was solved by calculating 
the mean number of victims per case for the 5,491 cases. This mean number 
was then multiplied by the estimated number of cases to arrive at an esti-
mated number of reported victims.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   127 25/06/2015   11:16:59



128 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

The estimated number of reported victims was then corrected taking into 
consideration the amount of time that each person was a victim. This made it 
possible to arrive at an estimate of the number of reported victims at any 
point in time (a so-called “stock estimate”) (see the ILO report ([3], p. 35)).

As a last step, a multiplier method was used to estimate the number of unre-
ported victims at any point in time. Here the multiplier was derived from data 
from four national surveys of returned migrants residing in their home areas.

Discussion of the International Labour Organization estimate

Before discussing the ILO report in more detail, the authors of this article 
would like to emphasize that they appreciate the work that has been done and 
basically have a positive evaluation of the approach. Nonetheless, they think 
that the work can be improved. Some suggestions have to wait until ILO 
works on a third global estimate (the 2012 estimate was the second estimate, 
following an earlier estimate, in 2005). Other suggestions may in principle be 
considered now; the authors believe that this will lead to better estimates 
using the current data.

(a) Three teams instead of two

ILO researchers were right in not making an estimate using the two-list esti-
mator, as the independence assumption for the probabilities of the two teams 
is for obvious reasons clearly violated. However, there are two ways to try to 
tackle this problem.

One way would be to make use of more than two teams. As discussed above 
in the section entitled “Capture-recapture methodology using multiple 
sources”, with two lists (i.e. two teams) it is necessary to assume independ-
ence of inclusion probabilities. However, with three lists this is not necessary: 
pairwise dependence between sources is allowed and the independence 
assumption is replaced by the absence of a loglinear three-factor interaction, 
which is much less restrictive. 

If the ILO report for 2012 were to disentangle the cases found by a team and 
separate them into cases found by each of the eight team members, it would 
result in eight separate lists. By linking these lists, an 8-way contingency table 
could be constructed that could be analysed using not only standard loglinear 
models, but also latent variable models that assume that some team members 
are more successful in finding cases than other team members (for further 
details, see Fienberg, Johnson and Junker [30]). 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   128 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 129

(b) Covariates

A second way to move away from the unrealistic two-list estimator while stay-
ing in the two-list capture-recapture approach is by directly including covari-
ates into the estimation problem.* One likely reason that the inclusion 
probability of a case for team 1 is related to the inclusion probability of a case 
for team 2 is the dependence of these probabilities on covariates. Taking  
such covariates into account in the modelling phase can make the model 
more realistic. 

Two examples of covariates that will probably be related are: (a) the place 
where the piece of recorded information is found (cases reported in some 
places will be easier to find by both teams than cases reported in other places 
or not reported at all); and (b) the number of victims involved in a case. Of 
course, other covariates can be explored, as the data set has about 70 covari-
ates that can be investigated. Thus the question of which covariates to use 
becomes an empirical question that can be answered by analysing the data.

As for the question of the number of victims involved in a case, as mentioned 
above, in the ILO report, the mean number of reported victims was multi-
plied by the estimated number of cases. However, it is also stated in the ILO 
report that “cases found more than once tended to contain higher numbers of 
victims than those found only once. For example, the average number of vic-
tims in cases found just once was 223. In cases found twice, it was 253 and in 
cases found more than twice, it was 812” ([3], p. 25). This makes it problem-
atic to multiply the estimated number of cases by the mean number of vic-
tims. It is likely that, if there is a positive relation between the number of 
victims included in a case and the number of times a case is found, then cases 
that are not found (but estimated) are very likely to have on average a number 
of victims that is lower than 223. 

One solution to this problem is to bring in the number of victims of a case as 
a covariate in the statistical model. Thus the model would yield an estimated 
number of victims for each case that was unobserved but estimated; in other 
words, the model will estimate not only the number of cases missed but also 
the number of victims involved for each of the cases.

* Covariates are considered in the ILO report for the incidents, namely region and form of forced 
labor, but the authors of this article have the impression that these variables are taken into account by 
doing separate capture-recapture analyses for each of the subgroups. The suggestion here is to 
estimate a statistical model along the lines discussed in this article in the section entitled “Capture-
recapture methodology using a single list”: using the Chao estimator that takes covariate information 
into account.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   129 25/06/2015   11:16:59



130 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

(c) The Chao estimator

Turning to the single-source capture-recapture approach, as mentioned above 
in the section entitled “Capture-recapture methodology using a single list”, 
the Chao estimator provides a lower bound estimate of the population size 
and this lower bound is closer to the true population size when the counts are 
generated by a homogeneous Poisson distribution. The ILO report is overly 
optimistic about the fit of the Poisson distribution to the data (see the ILO 
report [3], p. 26).

One way to ensure that (the lower bound of) the Chao estimate is closer to 
the true population size is by including covariates. This can be done using the 
approach where the Poisson parameter in the Chao estimator is a function of 
covariates (see Böhning and others [41]). For the ILO estimate, this implies 
that the current estimate may well be too low and that by including covariates 
into the model, the estimate will become larger and closer to the true esti-
mate. The number of victims involved in a case is a natural candidate for 
being a covariate.

(d) Multiplier method

As a last step, a multiplier method was used to estimate the number of unre-
ported victims at any point in time. Here the multiplier was derived from four 
national surveys, mostly surveys of returned migrants residing in their home 
areas.* The estimate arrived at was that 3.6 per cent of the cases of forced 
labour are reported. This leads to a multiplier of (100 – 3.6) / 3.6 = 26.8. In 
other words, for each reported case of forced labour there are an estimated 
26.8 unreported cases. 

Closer examination of this multiplier produces at least two concerns. The  
first concern is that the percentage is very low and this makes the multiplier 
very unstable. For example, 3.6 per cent every reported case is to be multiplied 
with 26.8. With a slightly different percentage, say, 5 per cent, this multiplier 
changes to 19. Thus this makes the final ILO estimate very unstable. It appears 
that, in the ILO report, random variation of about 3.6 per cent has not been 
taken into account in the confidence interval of the final ILO estimate.

* The results of four of the pilot surveys discussed in the ILO survey guidelines to estimate 
forced labour of adults and children have been used in the context of the generation of the ILO 
global estimate of forced labour in 2012 ([45], p. 9). ILO did not disclose the names of the four 
countries used.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   130 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 131

The second concern is related to the first concern. In the surveys the percent-
age of cases reported is 3.6 per cent. Similar to two-sample capture-recapture 
methodology, there is an independence assumption underlying the multiplier 
method. This independence assumption relates to the question: will 3.6 per 
cent also be the percentage of the cases reported not in the surveys? This is 
the assumption made. However, it is unclear how this percentage relates to 
percentages in countries other than the four countries with a survey, whether 
this percentage is actually higher among those victims who came back than 
among victims who did not come back, and so on. It follows from the first 
point that minor deviations from the independence assumption will lead to 
large deviations in the estimate of the population size.

Discussion

The capture-recapture method is a well-known method used in social sci-
ences and public health research for estimating the total size of hidden or 
hard-to-reach populations (see, for example, International Working Group 
for Disease Monitoring and Forecasting [23] and Chao and others [24]). In 
this article, the aim has been to provide an overview of the different ways in 
which the capture-recapture method can be applied. 

The authors consider the methodologies discussed in this article to be some of 
the viable methods that can be used to obtain local estimates of the total num-
ber of trafficked persons. The capture-recapture methodology has also been 
applied for the purpose of producing global estimates. ILO has applied the 
capture-recapture method by using a combination of all the methodologies 
discussed in the last three sections of this article, in order to reach the estimate 
of 20.9 million victims of forced labour globally, and the authors have provided 
some suggestions to further improve that estimate. When comparing the pro-
duction of local estimates with the production of global estimates, it seems that, 
because of extrapolation issues in producing the global estimates, the global esti-
mates have to meet a greater number of assumptions, which seems to make them 
more vulnerable than local estimates in terms of their reliability and validity.

In practical situations, when local estimates for a particular type of human traf-
ficking are needed, the main challenge is to find the methodology that best fits 
the problem. When applying the capture-recapture methodology in the field of 
human trafficking in a particular location and time, it is likely that not all the 
assumptions of the capture-recapture method will be met (see National Rappor-
teur [9], p. 28). This, however, does not necessarily mean that no single method 
can be used to estimate the size of the target population. As an example, consider 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   131 25/06/2015   11:16:59



132 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

one of the capture-recapture assumptions that there must be a closed population 
(discussed above in the sections entitled “Capture-recapture methodology using 
multiple sources” and “Capture-recapture methodology using a single list”). In 
many locations in the world, this assumption will be violated in research on traf-
ficked persons—for instance, trafficked persons who have been sexually exploited: 
research has shown some kind of (local) mobility (e.g. between cities) of traf-
ficked persons in the sex industry (see, for example, Siegel [46]). In these loca-
tions, the research population is open and this hinders the capture-recapture 
estimation procedures discussed above in the sections entitled “Capture-
recapture methodology using multiple sources” and “Capture-recapture 
methodology using a single list”. One solution discussed in those sections, 
namely limiting the period of observation, may help to circumvent the prob-
lem but the effectiveness of this solution will depend on the time intervals in 
circulating the trafficked persons. Yet choosing this alternative implies an esti-
mate on trafficked persons that has the disadvantage of having a relatively 
larger confidence interval. On the other hand, it may still be viable to estimate 
the size of the population using the multiplier method. Here two elements are 
needed, a register and a multiplier, and these are not necessarily hampered by 
an open population problem when they are suitably chosen. Also, it is worth 
considering that violation of one or more of the capture-recapture assump-
tions in research on a particular form of human trafficking does not necessar-
ily imply that the same assumptions are also violated in research on another 
form of human trafficking. For instance, persons who are trafficked for the 
purpose of being exploited as agricultural workers may be circulated less 
often; thus the assumption of a closed population might be met more easily.

In closing, it should be noted that there are also other methods that can theo-
retically be used in specific situations to estimate the size of populations. 
Those methods include respondent-driven sampling, the network scale-up 
method, detection controlled estimation and randomized response. Space 
limitations have prevented the authors from discussing those methods in any 
detail in this article. They are only mentioned here, as introductions on the 
use of those methods can be found on the web.

References

 1. Eurostat, Trafficking in Human Beings, Methodologies and Working Papers 
(Luxembourg, Publications Office of the European Union, 2013). 

 2. Global Report on Trafficking in Persons 2012 (United Nations publication, Sales 
No. E.13.IV.1).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   132 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 133

 3. International Labour Organization, ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour: Results 
and Methodology (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2012). 

 4. Michaëlla de Cock, “Directions for national and international data collection on 
forced labour”, Working Paper, No. 30 (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2007). 

 5. Amy Farrel and others, Review of Existing Estimates of Victims of Human Traffick-
ing in the United States and Recommendations for Improving Research and Measurement of 
Human Trafficking (Washington, D.C., Humanity United, 2009). 

 6. Jo Goodey, “Human trafficking: sketchy data and policy responses”, Criminology 
and Criminal Justice, vol. 8, No. 4 (2008), pp. 421-442. 

 7. Amanda J. Gould, “From pseudoscience to protoscience: estimating human 
trafficking and modern forms of slavery”, paper submitted for the Second Annual 
Interdisciplinary Conference on Human Trafficking, October 2010. 

 8. Elzbieta M. Gozdziak and Elizabeth A. Collett, “Research on human trafficking 
in North America: a review of literature”, in Data and Research on Human Trafficking: 
A Global Survey — Offprint of the Special Issue of International Migration Vol. 43 (1/2) 
2005, Frank Laczko and Elzbieta Gozdziak, eds. (Geneva, International Organization 
for Migration, 2005), pp. 99-128. 

 9. National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence 
against Children, Trafficking in Human Beings: Visible and Invisible — A Quantitative 
Report 2007-2011 (The Hague, Bureau Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel, 2012). 

 10. Erin O’Brien, “Dark numbers: challenges in measuring human trafficking”, 
Dialogue e-Journal, vol. 7, No. 2 (2012). 

 11. Gury Tyldum, “Limitations in research on human trafficking”, International 
Migration, vol. 48, No. 5 (October 2010), pp. 1-13. 

 12. Ronald Weitzer, “New directions in research on human trafficking”, The Annals of 
the American Academy of Political Social Science, vol. 653, No. 1 (May 2014), pp. 6-24. 

 13. Sheldon X. Zhang, “Measuring labor trafficking: a research note”, Crime, Law 
and Social Change, vol. 58, No. 4 (2012), pp. 469-482. 

 14. Sheldon X. Zhang and others, “Estimating labor trafficking among unauthor-
ized migrant workers in San Diego”, The Annals of the American Academy of Political 
and Social Science, vol. 653, No. 1 (May 2014), pp. 65-86. 

 15. United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.

 16. Andrea Di Nicola, “Researching into human trafficking: issues and problems”, 
in Human Trafficking, Maggy Lee, ed. (Cullompton, Devon, Willan Publishing, 2007), 
pp. 49-72. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   133 25/06/2015   11:16:59



134 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

 17. Frank Laczko and Marco A. Gramegna, “Developing better indicators of human 
trafficking”, Brown Journal of World Affairs, vol. X, No. 1 (Summer/Fall 2003), 
pp. 179-194.

 18. United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Abuse of a Position of  Vulnerability and 
Other “Means” within the Definition of Trafficking in Persons, Issue Paper (Vienna, 2013). 

 19. H. J. Clawson, M. Layne and K. Small, Estimating Human Trafficking into the 
United States: Development of a Methodology, document No. 215475 (Fairfax, Virginia, 
Caliber, 2006). 

 20. Frank Laczko, “Data and research on human trafficking”, International Migra-
tion, vol. 43, Nos. 1 and 2 (2005), pp. 5-16. 

 21. G. Tyldum and A. Brunovskis, “Describing the unobserved: methodological 
challenges in empirical studies on human trafficking”, International Migration,  
vol. 43, Nos. 1 and 2 (2005), pp. 17-34. 

 22. Yvonne M. Bishop, Stephen E. Fienberg and Paul W. Holland, Discrete Multi-
variate Analysis: Theory and Applications, reprint of the 1975 edition published by MIT 
Press (New York, Springer Science and Business Media, 2007). 

 23. International Working Group for Disease Monitoring and Forecasting, “Capture-
recapture and multiple record systems estimation; part I: history and theoretical devel-
opment”, American Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 142, No. 10 (1995), pp. 047-1068. 

 24. Anne Chao and others, “The applications of capture-recapture models to epide-
miological data”, Statistics in Medicine, vol. 20, No. 20 (2001), pp. 3123-3157. 

 25. Peter G. M. van der Heijden and others, “People born in the Middle East but 
residing in the Netherlands: invariant population size estimates and the role of active 
and passive covariates”, Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 6, No. 3 (2012), pp. 831-852. 

 26. Susanna Gerritse, Peter G.M. van der Heijden and B.F.M. Bakker, “Sensitivity 
of population size estimation for violating parametric assumptions in loglinear mod-
els”, paper presented at the MTO Colloquium, Tilburg, Netherlands, January 2014. 

 27. Eugene N. Zwane, Karin van der Pal-de Bruin and Peter G. M. van der Heijden, 
“The multiple-record systems estimator when registrations refer to different but over-
lapping populations”, Statistics in Medicine, vol. 23, No. 14 (2004), pp. 2267-2281. 

 28. Shirley Pledger, Kenneth H. Pollock and James L. Norris, “Open capture- 
recapture models with heterogeneity: 1—Cormack-Jolly-Seber model”, Biometrics, 
vol. 59, No. 4 (2003), pp. 786-794. 

 29. Thomas N. Herzog, Fritz J. Scheuren and William E. Winkler, Data Quality and 
Record Linkage Techniques (New York, Springer Science and Business Media, 2007). 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   134 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Estimating the size of hard-to-reach populations using capture-recapture  methodology 135

 30. Stephen E. Fienberg, Matthew Johnson and Brian W. Junker, “Classical multi-
level and Bayesian approaches to population size estimation using multiple lists”, 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Statistics in Society-Series A, vol. 162, No. 3 
(1999), pp. 383-405. 

 31. Anthony J. Webster and Richard Kemp, “Estimating omissions from searches”, 
The American Statistician, vol. 67, No. 2 (2013), pp. 82-89. 

 32. Peter G. M. van der Heijden, Maarten J. L. F. Cruyff and Dankmar Bohning, 
“Capture-recapture to estimate crime populations”, in Encyclopedia of Criminology 
and Criminal Justice, Gerben Bruinsma and David Weisburd, eds. (New York, Springer 
Science and Business Media, 2014), pp. 267-278. 

 33. Peter G. M. van der Heijden, Maarten J. L. F. Cruyff and Hans C. van  Houwelingen, 
“Estimating the size of a criminal population from police registrations using the trun-
cated Poisson regression model”, Statistica Neerlandica, vol. 57, No. 3 (2003), 
pp. 289-304. 

 34. Peter G. M. van der Heijden and others, “Point and interval estimation of the 
truncated Poisson regression model”, Statistical Modelling, vol. 3, No. 4 (2003),  
pp. 305-322. 

 35. Maarten J.L.F. Cruyff and Peter G. M. van der Heijden, “Point and interval 
estimation of the population size using a zero-truncated negative binomial regression 
model”, Biometrical Journal, vol. 50, No. 6 (2008), pp. 1035-1050. 

 36. N.H.A. van Hest and others, “Estimating infectious diseases incidence: validity 
of capture-recapture analysis and truncated models for incomplete count data”, 
 Epidemiology and Infection, vol. 136, No. 1 (2007), pp. 14-22. 

 37. Daniel Zelterman, “Robust estimation in truncated discrete distributions with 
application to capture-recapture experiments”, Journal of Statistical Planning and 
Inference, vol. 18, No. 2 (1988), pp. 225-237. 

 38. Dankmar Böhning and Peter G. M. van der Heijden, “A covariate adjustment 
for zero-truncated approaches to estimating the size of hidden and elusive popula-
tions”, The Annals of Applied Statistics, vol. 3, No. 2 (2009), pp. 595-610. 

 39. Anne Chao, “Estimating animal abundance with capture frequency data”, Jour-
nal of Wildlife Management, vol. 52, No. 2 (1988), pp. 295-300. 

 40. Dankmar Böhning, “Some general comparative points on Chao’s and Zelter-
man’s estimators of population size”, Scandinavian Journal of Statistics, vol. 37, No. 2 
(2010), pp. 221-236. 

 41. Dankmar Böhning and others, “A generalization of Chao’s estimator for covari-
ate information”, Biometrics, vol. 69, No. 4 (2013), pp. 1033-1042. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   135 25/06/2015   11:16:59



136 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

 42. Peter G. M. van der Heijden, Guus Cruts and Maarten Cruyff, “Methods for 
population size estimation of problem drug users using a single registration”, Interna-
tional Journal of Drug Policy, vol. 24, No. 6 (2013), pp. 614-618. 

 43. European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Abuse, Annual Report 2011: 
The State of the Drugs Problem in Europe (Luxembourg, Publications Office of the 
European Union, 2011). 

 44. A.A.N. Cruts and M. W. van Laar, “Aantal problematische harddrugsgebruikers 
in Nederland” (Utrecht, Netherlands, Trimbos Institute, Netherlands Institute of 
Mental Health and Addiction, 2010). 

 45. International Labour Organization, Hard to See, Harder to Count: Survey Guide-
lines to Estimate Forced Labour of Adults and Children (Geneva, International Labour 
Office, 2012). 

 46. Dina Siegel, “Mobility of sex workers in European cities”, European Journal of 
Criminal Policy and Research, vol. 18, No. 3 (2012), pp. 255-268. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   136 25/06/2015   11:16:59



137

STEALING LABOUR: AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF 
FORCED LABOUR AND HUMAN TRAFFICKING 

By Fabrizio Sarrica*

“Labour was the first price, the original purchase-money that was paid for all things. 
It was not by gold or by silver, but by labour, that all wealth of the world was origi-
nally purchased ...” (Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations, 1789)

Abstract

The author approaches trafficking in persons and forced labour from the per-
spective of the labour market. The basic consideration is that traffickers and 
exploiters are robbing the communities of victims of trafficking in persons of 
their most valuable resource: labour. He compares the economic conditions 
of the labourer and the employer in an exploitative situation against condi-
tions where the labourer is free to choose his or her working conditions. He 
calculates the economic losses and the benefits in each account of trafficking 
in persons, revealing who gains and who loses as a result of such crimes. 
According to the author, not only do forced labour and human trafficking 
have an economic impact on the victims and their communities, but also soci-
ety as a whole suffers economic losses when coerced labour is used.

Keywords: trafficking in persons, forced labour, labour market, elasticity of labour 
demand and supply, exploiter, victim, development and crime

Cheap labour and its maximum use are the quest of persons who engage in 
human trafficking. These criminals are recruiting, deceiving, buying, selling, 
transporting, segregating and coercing other people for the economic value 
that can be squeezed from the victims’ labour. Traffickers steal the economic 
value of this labour from their victims. Of course, this is just part of the story. 
While the traffickers are pursuing this economic goal, the victims of human 
trafficking are, in addition to being deprived of the value of their labour, are 
also often deprived of their dignity, their health and their lives. Victims of 
human trafficking or forced labour suffer terrible human rights violations that 
will affect them for the rest of their lives.

Forced labour, including trafficking in persons for the purpose of forced labour, 
slavery and similar practices, is a crime driven by the demand for cheap labour. 

* Research Officer, Global Report on Trafficking in Persons Unit, United Nations Office on Drugs 
and Crime.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   137 25/06/2015   11:16:59



138 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

The demand for forced labourers, including trafficked persons, is ultimately the 
demand for the services provided by the person who is forced to work [1]. 

The aim of this article is to understand how such crime is affected by the 
dynamics of the labour markets in which the victims of such crime are forced 
to operate. The article also includes a discussion on the economic impact of 
forced labour and human trafficking on society as whole, on the victims and 
on their communities.

Forced labour is defined in the Forced Labour Convention, 1930 (No. 29), as 
“all work or service which is exacted from any person under the menace of 
any penalty and for which the said person has not offered himself voluntarily” 
[2]. The definition comprises two elements: the work is undertaken involun-
tarily; and this happens because the labourer is under the menace of a penalty. 
It is clear that the first element is the consequence of the second. In short, 
forced labour is about forcing persons to accept employment, or terms of 
employment, that they would otherwise reject [3]. 

The concept of human trafficking is closely connected with that of forced 
labour. It can be summarized as the acquisition of people by improper means 
such as force, fraud or deception, for the purpose of exploiting them.* So, if a 
victim of forced labour has been recruited, transported or harboured with 
improper means, he or she can be legally defined as a trafficking victim, and 
the recruiter, transporter or harbourer is a trafficker. 

The economics of slavery 

These forms of labour exploitation are not just recent phenomena. Historically, 
a large part of labour transactions have been coercive [4]. Slavery and forced 
labour were common forms of labour in many civilizations, from the time of the 
Roman Empire to rural Russia in the eighteenth century and to the cotton 
fields of the United States of America in the nineteenth century. Nowadays, 
forms of slavery and forced labour are still present—the International Labour 
Organization (ILO) has estimated that there are over 20 million forced 

* In article 3 of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially 
Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organ-
ized Crime [4], “trafficking in persons” is defined as follows: “Trafficking in persons shall mean the 
recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of threat or use of 
force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a 
position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of 
a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall 
include, at a minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploita-
tion, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of 
organs” (General Assembly resolution 55/25, annex II).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   138 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 139

labourers worldwide [5], including in the sex industry. ILO research indicates 
that the global illegal profit made through the economic exploitation of forced 
labourers, outside the sex industry, has reached $10.4 billion ([6], para. 145).

For decades, economists have been debating about the viability of an economy 
where the labour market included forms of coerced labour. In 1789, Adam 
Smith stated that assessing the costs of the labour conducted by slaves to be the 
most expensive form of labour, argued that, to satisfy the demand for labour, it 
was cheaper to use the free labour supply than slave labour.

Studies have recently been conducted on the effect of coerced labour on the 
economy in the nineteenth century (see Loria and Bouchard [8] and Wakefield 
[9]). In the 1970s, Fogel and Engerman [10] concluded that during the period 
of slavery in the United States, African slaves had a relatively high productivity 
and the slave system was economically efficient. In the discussion below, the 
conclusions of Fogel and Engerman are challenged. 

Domar [11] provided an analysis of the contribution of coerced labour to 
economic development throughout history, using as examples the Roman 
Empire, Russia in the fifteenth century and slavery in the Americas. He 
hypothesized that an increased supply of labour reduces the economic attrac-
tiveness of making use of forced labour, and this is the reason why in ancient 
times slavery and serfdom were introduced during periods of demographic 
decline due to war, famine or disease. According to Domar, the development 
of capital-intensive economic sectors made slavery economically unattractive. 
Domar’s view is also discussed below. 

In 1971, Bergstrom argued that slavery was an economically viable system in the 
United States prior to the Civil War; he described it as an efficient means of dis-
tributing wealth in a manner favourable to slaves [12]. Conversely, Barzel [13] 
argued that slave labour was economically efficient only for certain types of work 
activity, such as working on large cotton plantations, because free labourers 
refused to work under the inhumane conditions that slaves were forced to work 
under, even if the remuneration offered for working under those conditions was 
higher than the wages offered for other jobs. Thus, while it is true that slaves 
received better remuneration than free labourers, it is also true that the type of 
work done by slaves would have never been accepted by the slaves if they had 
been free to choose [13].

Basu [14] defines labour coercion as forcing a worker into an exchange for 
labour from which he or she obtains a negative utility. Naqvi and Wemhöner 
[15] consider that, given a person’s feasible set of actions, labour coercion 
implies compelling an agent to engage in transactions that he or she would 
not have chosen to engage in. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   139 25/06/2015   11:16:59



140 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

More recently, Acemoglu and Wolitzky [3] proposed a microeconomic model 
of labour coercion. They demonstrated that, under equal conditions, greater 
demand for labour increases the economic incentive to make use of labour 
coercion. They hypothesized that the relation between labour scarcity and 
intensity of coercion may be positive or negative depending on the structure 
of the market where coerced labour is used. Finally, they demonstrated that 
coercion is always socially inefficient, as it involves costly ways of transferring 
resources and utility from workers to employees. Their conclusions are also 
discussed below, together with an alternative to their analysis. 

The labour market 

In order to assess how the dynamics of the labour market may influence traf-
ficking in persons and forced labour and how these crimes do have an eco-
nomic impact on the victims and their communities, the analysis starts with 
the basics of labour economics and compares a situation of free labour and 
one of trafficking.

Figure I shows the demand for labour (D) and the labour supply (S).

Figure I. The labour market: in a free labour market and under exploitative 
working conditions

The horizontal axis shows the quantity of labour demanded (in hours per day). 
The vertical axis shows the hourly wages. The labour demand curve (D) shows 
how much the employer would pay to receive a certain amount of labour. The 
labour supply curve (S) shows the quantity of hours that the labourer would be 
ready to work for that hourly wage. At the same time, it shows the wages that the 

 

Demand for 
labour 

Supply of 
labour 

Wages 

Wtr 

Htr-v Htr Hours 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   140 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 141

labourer would accept to provide a specific quantity of labour [16]. The shape 
and the inclination of the curve depend on the type of labour demanded and on 
the individual preferences of the person demanding such working activity.

The labourer would like to receive as much wages as possible, and the employer 
would like to pay as little wages as possible. If all the theoretical assumptions 
are satisfied, in a free labour market the demand for and supply of labour may 
find stability (see figure I).

In a free labour market, supply and demand may also never meet (see figure II), 
and thus there may be no equilibrium on the labour market. For example, 
 Barzel [13] reported on the inhumane working conditions in the cotton fields at 
the time of slavery in the United States. Such working conditions prevented free 
labourers from accepting wages that would have been higher than in other types 
of field labour. Certain types of work would be accepted by potential employees 
only if they were paid wages higher than what the employer would be willing to 
offer. In these cases, there would be no equilibrium on the labour market. 

Figure II. When supply and demand do not meet

In addition, there are working activities that would never be accepted regardless 
of the wages offered. In such cases, the supply curve would always coincide 
with the vertical axis.

If and when equilibrium is reached, the number of hours worked Heq and the 
amount of wages paid Weq satisfy both parties. The surplus of the supplier of 
labour represents the labourer’s economic benefit for working each hour up to 
Heq, at an hourly wage (Weq) greater than he or she would have requested to 
work that hour. Similarly, the surplus of the demand for labour is the economic 

 Wages 

-Hours +Hours 

Supply of 
labour 

Demand for 
labour 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   141 25/06/2015   11:16:59



142 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

benefit that the employer gains for each working hour up to Heq paid less (Weq) 
than what he or she would have paid the labourer for that working hour. 

In figure III, area A represents the surplus of the labourer for agreeing to work 
an amount of hours Heq, and area B represents the surplus of the supplier for 
agreeing to pay an hourly wage Weq. 

Figure III. Equilibrium in the labour market and benefits for the stakeholders

The economics of forced labour and human trafficking

In a context of coerced labour, whether the supply of and the demand for labour 
meet or not is totally irrelevant. The quantity of hours worked and the salary are 
imposed on the victim, who has no possibility of negotiating or refusing.

Under exploitative circumstances, the victim is forced to work more than he 
or she ordinarily would and for a salary that is much lower than he or she 
ordinarily would have accepted. 

The exploitative working conditions that are typical in cases of forced labour and 
human trafficking are shown in figure I and can be mathematically summarized 
as follows:

(a) Htr > Heq >Htr-v and Wtr < Weq < Wtr-v

where Htr is the number of hours that the victim of trafficking is forced to 
work, Htr-v is the number of hours that the victim would work for the salary 
received, Wtr is the salary that the victim receives and Wtr-v is the salary that the 
victim would require for that amount of work.

 

A 

B 

Hours Heq 

Supply of 
labour 

Demand 
for labour 

Wages 

Weq 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   142 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 143

The hours the victim is forced to work are more than the hours the victim 
would work for the salary received. The salary the victim receives is less than the 
salary the victim would require for that amount of work. An increase of the 
extent of exploitation can be mathematically represented by an increase in the 
difference between the desired salary and the salary actually given ∆W: Wtr – Wtr-v  
and between the desired hours worked and the actual hours worked under 
coercion ∆H: Htr – Htr-v.

The victim’s economic loss

Under exploitative working conditions, mathemically summarized in (a), the 
victim will be paid much less than he or she would in a free market. Not only 
the victim’s income, but also the surplus of the labour supply will be reduced 
compared with the free market situation. In figure IV, area C represents the 
victim’s income loss due to reduced salary. 

Figure IV. Economic loss of victims of forced labour

Area D is the loss of the victim’s economic surplus. The victim’s total eco-
nomic loss* is shown in figure IV as area C + D:  

Victim’s loss = C + D = (Wtr-v – Wtr) * Htr  (1)

Equation (1) is not only an abstract mathematical exercise, but also a practi-
cal tool for calculating the compensation of the victim for at least some part 
of the economic damages he or she suffered. 

* In addition, most victims of forced labour are exposed to violence, abuses and threats that cannot 
be measured in terms of money.

 

Hours 

Supply of 
labour 

Htr 

Demand 
for labour 

Htr-v 

D 

C 

Htr-v’ Htr-v’’ 

Wtr 

Wtr-v’ 

Wtr-v’’ 

Wtr-v 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   143 25/06/2015   11:16:59



144 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Equation (1) can be further developed as follows: 

Victim’s loss = (Wtr-v * Htr) – (Wtr * Htr) (2)

Factor 1 is defined as the salary the victim would demand multiplied by the total 
number of hours he or she has been coerced into working (Wtr-v * Htr). Factor 2 is 
defined as the salary offered multiplied by the number of working hours imposed 
on the victim (Wtr * Htr). 

Equation (2) can be simplified as follows:

Victim’s loss = factor 1 – factor 2  (3)

The greater the demand for labour, the higher the salary demanded, and thus, 
the higher factor 1. Equation (3) implies that increased demand for labour on 
the market results in greater economic damages for the exploited worker.

Furthermore, the greater the labour supply, the less the salary offered. Con-
versely, the less the supply of labour, the greater the demand (and the more the 
employer is willing to pay for a certain number of hours worked). Equation (3) 
implies that under exploitative working conditions, the victim’s loss is greater 
when the labour supply is smaller. As shown in figure V, when the initial labour 
supply S1 changes to a reduced labour supply S2, the area indicating the victim’s 
loss increases. 

Figure V. Victim’s economic losses for different labour supplies 

Equation (2) can also be developed as follows:

Victim’s loss = Htr [(Wtr-v – Wtr)/(Htr – Htrv)] (Htr – Htrv) (4)

 

Hours Htr 

S1 

S2 

Wtr 

Wtr-v1 

Wtr-v2 

D 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   144 25/06/2015   11:16:59



Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 145

Victim’s loss = Htr (ΔH/ΔW) (Htr – Htrv)   (5)

When calculated over the labour supply curve, ∆H/∆W is the own wage elas-
ticity of the labour supply εw. Hence: 

Victim’s loss = Htr * εw (Htr – Htrv)    (6)

According to equation (6), the more rigid the labour supply curve, the greater 
the economic loss of the victims of forced labour. Equation (6) is represented 
by area C+D in figure VI. This area is greater when, rebus sic stantibus, the 
labour supply curve is more rigid compared with a more elastic labour supply. 
When the initial labour supply S1 changes to a more rigid labour supply S2, 
the area indicating the victim’s loss increases. 

Figure VI. Victim’s economic losses for different elasticities of the labour supply 

In practice, when the labour supply is more rigid to variation of salary, labour 
activities become particularly hard for the worker: for an additional hour of 
work, the labourer would demand a substantially higher remuneration. 
 Victims are more affected economically when exploited in more difficult 
labour activities. What is less evident is that the elasticity of the demand for 
labour also has an impact on the victim’s economic loss. The same ΔH/ΔW, 
when calculated over the labour demand curve, is the own wage elasticity of 
the demand for labour ηw. The more elastic the demand for labour, the greater 
the victim’s economic loss. As shown in figure VII, when the initial labour 
demand D1 changes to a more elastic labour demand D2, the area indicating 
the victim’s loss increases.

 

Hours Htr 

S1 

S2 

Wtr 

Wtr-v1 

Wtr-v2 

D 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   145 25/06/2015   11:16:59



146 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Figure VII. Victim’s economic losses for different labour demands

The victim’s economic loss is also affected by the structure of labour supply 
and demand in the free market, as the structure is a function of the elasticity of 
the supply and demand curves. Some forms of trafficking end in exploitation 
that is not acceptable to the victims regardless of the remuneration. In such 
cases, for every Htr > 0, Wtr-v → ∞; thus, according to equation (3), victim’s loss 
→ ∞. This type of labour can be represented graphically by a labour supply 
curve that never appears in the positive quadrant (see figure VIII).

Figure VIII. Labour market when the supply is never positive

The economic gain of the exploiter 

Obviously, there are more economic benefits to be gained by using victims of 
forced labour than by using free labourers. This additional economic surplus 
of the demand for labour is shown as area F in figure IX. The exploiter’s 
increased economic benefits are directly derived from the victim’s reduced 

 

Hours D1 

D2 

Htr1 Htr2 

Wtr 

Wtr-v1 

Wtr-v2 

S 

 

Htr1 
D1 

D2 

Wtr-v1 

Wtr 

Wtr-v2 

S 

Hours Htr2 

 

+Hours 

Wages 

-Hours 

Demand 
Supply 

Wtr-v 

Wtr 

Htr Htr-v 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   146 25/06/2015   11:17:00



Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 147

benefits. In the words of Acemoglu and Wolitzky, coercion allows the pro-
ducer to steal utility from the agent [3].

Figure IX. Economic gain of the demand in situations of forced labour

This additional economic surplus of the exploiter is shown in equation (6):

F = (Weq Heq) + ∫Heq
Htr W d(h) – (Wtr Htr)  (6)

F = (Weq – Wtr)
2 (Heq – Htr)/(Weq – Wtr) + HtrWeq + HeqWtr + ∫Heq

Htr W d(h) (7)

where factor 3 is defined as ((Weq – Wtr)
2 (Heq – Htr)/(Weq – Wtr) and  

factor 4 is defined as HtrWeq + HeqWtr + ∫Heq
Htr W d(h). 

Thus, equation (7) becomes: 

exploiter’s gain = factor 3 + factor 4                  (8)

If the exploitative working conditions, mathemically summarized in (a) on 
page 142, are applied to equation (7) and then to equation (8), equation (8) 
will always be > 0. 

It is always economically advantageous for the employer to exploit workers, 
regardless of the labour market or the economic situation, unless an efficient 
criminal justice system serves as an adequate disincentive.

Of course, such exploitation is more economically advantageous under some 
economic conditions than under others. By definition, factor 3 is a function 
of the own wage elasticity of the demand for labour ηw: (Heq − Htr)/(Weq −Wtr), 
multiplied by the squared variation of the salary. Thus, according to equation 
(8), the more rigid the demand for labour, the greater factor 3—and the eco-
nomic gain of the employer who makes use of forced labour—will be.

HoursHtr

Demand for 
labour

Supply of 
labour

Htr-v

F

E

Wtr

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   147 25/06/2015   11:17:00



148 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

According to the Hicks-Marshall laws of derived demand ([17], [18]), more 
rigid demand for labour is characterized by short run productions, difficulty 
in finding substitutes, reduced proportion of labour costs to production costs 
and rigid demand for the final services or goods produced. These are the pro-
duction contexts where it is more profitable to make use of exploitative work-
ing conditions, and where more attention should be paid by the criminal 
justice system. 

Figure IX shows the transfer of welfare from the victim to the exploiter. This 
is not a linear function. By definition of factor 3, the exploiter’s gain is a nega-
tive exponential function of the salary reduction. By reducing a unit of salary 
per hour worked, the exploiter would increasingly and exponentially gain in 
terms of economic surplus. Not only does the exploiter have an economic 
interest in exploiting the victims, but this interest grows exponentially with 
the intensity of the exploitation. By definition of factor 4, equation (8) implies 
that the exploiter’s gain is positively related to the demand for labour. This 
has two implications: first, when the demand for labour is low, there is a 
reduced interest in using forced labour; second, the analysis confirms Domar’s 
idea that the diffusion of capital-intensive production reduces the advantages 
of forced labour. Economies based on labour-intensive production are more 
interested in making use of forced labour. 

The social cost of forced labour 

The analysis above shows forced labour and human trafficking are about 
transferring economic wealth from labour supply to the demand for labour, 
from the victims to the exploiters, from the victim’s community of origin to 
his or her community of destination. As mentioned above, the economic bene-
fits gained from the demand are stolen directly from the victim of forced 
labour. At the same time, not all the labourer’s loss is transferred to the 
demand for labour. Acemoglu and Wolitzky [3] demonstrated that utilitarian 
social welfare is always lower under coercion than in a free labour market; in 
this article an alternative analysis is proposed.

What is the part of economic wealth that is lost by forcing a person to work 
under exploitative working conditions? In a society comprising two persons, 
the exploiter and the victim, this can be easily calculated by subtracting the 
victim’s loss, as represented in equation (2), to the exploiter’s gain, as repre-
sented in equation (6). 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   148 25/06/2015   11:17:00



Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 149

Social balance = Weq Heq + ∫Heq
Htr W d(h) – Wtr Htr – Wtr-v Htr + Wtr Htr (10)

Social balance = Weq Heq – Wtr-v Htr + ∫Heq
Htr W d(h) (11)

The element ∫Heq
Htr W d(h) varies according to the hours of exploitation Htr, as 

well as the shape and inclination of the demand for labour. This element 
ranges from a minimum value ∫Heq

Htr W d(h) = 0, when Htr = Heq (i.e. when the 
curve representing the demand for labour is vertical) to a maximum value 
∫Heq

Htr W d(h) = (Htr –Heq)Wtr, when Wtr = Weq (i.e. when the curve representing 
the demand for labour is horizontal).

Assuming ∫Heq
Htr W d(h) reaches the maximum value, equation (11) turns into:

Social balance = Weq Heq – Wtr-v Htr + (Htr – Heq)Wtr  (12)

Social balance = Heq(Weq – Wtr) – Htr(Wtr-v – Wtr) (13)

Applying the exploitative working conditions, mathemically summarized in 
(a) on page 142, to equation (13) will result in:

Social balance always < 0 (14)

Equation (14) indicates that the exploiter’s economic gain does not compen-
sate for the victim’s economic loss. A society comprised of the aggregated 
supply and aggregated demand of labour always loses, passing from free 
labour to forced labour. This result is in line with Acemoglu and Wolitzky [3] 
while contradicting Bergstrom’s hypothesis that slavery is an economically 
viable system [12].

Furthermore, equation (13) indicates that the total welfare is a function of 
(Heq − Htr) and (Wtr-v −Wtr); thus, the higher the degree of exploitation, the 
more the loss will be to society as a whole. The more forced labour and 
trafficking for the purpose of forced labour are used, the higher the eco-
nomic costs to society as a whole. The social costs do not include public 
spending related to the provision of assistance to the victims of forced 
labour, law enforcement activities and measures connected with the 
prevention campaigns.

Discussion

Moving from the microlevel to the macrolevel, the passage of wealth from the 
demand for labour to the supply of labour by means of coercion can be 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   149 25/06/2015   11:17:00



150 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

substantially represented as the transfer of wealth from the victims to the 
exploiters. If the exploitation takes place within the same community, this 
wealth is transferred between the parties involved and remains within the 
same community. If the victim is recruited in one community and then 
exploited somewhere else, the economic value of the stolen labour is also 
transferred from the community of origin to the community where the victim 
is exploited. The element of “movement” brings economic losses to the vic-
tim’s community of origin, which are partly transferred into economic gains 
for the community of destination. 

In practice, the victims’ loss takes the form of reduced gross national product 
(GNP)* for the victim’s country or community of origin as a result of, for 
example, fewer remittances, and thus less savings, consumption and invest-
ment. At the same time, the exploiters will be able to consume, invest and 
save more, mainly in the community where the exploitation takes place. 

The above considerations can be used to calculate the extent of the economic 
impact of human trafficking and forced labour on the parties involved. Under 
normal circumstances, migrant agricultural workers would receive a freely 
negotiated salary reflecting their wishes and needs, and that would contribute 
to the GNP of their country or community of origin. Their remittances would 
be in the form of consumption, savings and investment; thus, the migrants’ 
salaries would also have a positive impact on the local economy in their home 
communities and the gross domestic product (GDP) in their home country. 
If the migrant workers were to become victims of forced labour, their exploit-
ative working conditions would have a negative economic impact on them 
and their community of origin in terms of their country’s GDP. 

As mentioned above, part of the economic loss of victims of forced labour is 
directly transferred to the country of destination. The greater surplus of 
demand for labour will take the form of cheaper labour at the disposal of the 
community of destination. Eventually, this will mean more profits and thus 
more investments for the demand for labour, and that will be translated into 
greater GDP for the community of destination. Eventually, the entire com-
munity of destination will profit from the labour stolen from the victim’s 
community of origin, in terms of greater GDP and lower-priced final goods 
produced under exploitative working conditions.

*GNP is the total value of all final goods and services produced by a country’s factors of production, 
in this case labour, and sold on the market in a given time period. In the case of trafficking, the 
victim’s loss is partially transferred to another community or country, which is the victim’s country of 
destination.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   150 25/06/2015   11:17:00



Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 151

As an example, in 2006, the Italian authorities investigated a case of traffick-
ing in persons for the purpose of forced labour in the agricultural sector. The 
operation was called “Terra Promessa”. Persons were recruited in Poland to 
work in the agricultural sector in the south of Italy. Before leaving for Italy, 
the workers agreed to certain working standards; eventually, they were forced 
at gunpoint to work under exploitative conditions. They had to work for 
15 hours per day, for a fee of about 3 euros per hour. In addition, the victims 
had to pay their exploiters for accommodation and food, as well as about  
300-500 euros as an initial fee for being given access to this “work opportu-
nity” [19]. The number of victims officially identified by the Italian authori-
ties was 113.

Calculations using equation (1) and the information reported above and in 
the court file on this trafficking cases how that, in this single account of traf-
ficking, about 10,000 euros per day were stolen from the victims’ community 
of origin.* The Polish authorities estimated that about 1,000 victims were 
involved in this type of trafficking during the 2006 agricultural season. The 
production period for this specific case would normally take 30-40 days. 
Thus, if all the assumptions are correct, this single account of trafficking 
would have had an economic impact on Poland amounting to about 3.5 mil-
lion euros for slightly more than one month of exploitation.**

In 2008, the International Labour Organization (ILO) conducted a study on 
the migrant labour force in the Republic of Moldova. As a result of this study, 
ILO estimated that 25,500 Moldovans were victims of trafficking for forced 
labour ([6], para. 62), working under conditions very similar to those uncov-
ered in operation “Terra Promessa”. If the parameters for the Polish victims 
are applied to the Moldovan victims, it can be calculated that the Republic of 

* According to information concerning operation “Terra Promessa” and reported by the Italian 
authorities and by investigative reporter Fabrizio Gatti [20], the victims were forced to collect 
tomatoes for 15 hours per day and received about 3 euros per hour, when remuneration was actually 
provided. As a consequence, these persons received at most about 40 euros per day. It is impossible to 
estimate the labour supply curve of those particular labourers; however, it can be assumed that Polish 
labourers willingly migrating to Italy to do some agricultural work would not have accepted economic 
conditions inferior to those they would have found in Poland at that time. According to ILO, minimum 
wages in Poland for agricultural work was in 2006 70 euros for an eight-hour working day. These 
persons would have agreed to work an additional seven hours for another 70 euros, as it is clear that 
they would normally have requested much more as compensation for the greater degree of fatigue. 
According to this very minimal working condition they would have accepted voluntarily, the total 
daily salary could have been 140 euros per day. As a result, it can be said that the exploiter stole from 
each victim 100 euros per day (140 – 40 euros). Multiplying 100 euros by the number of victims (113) 
yields 11,300 euros per day.

** The season for the collection of tomatoes normally lasts between 30 and 40 days per year. The 
value of the labour stolen to these victims was calculated to be about 11,300 euros per day, thus 
ranging from 340,000 to 452,000 euros per season for the 113 victims detected by the authorities. If 
the number of victims was about 1,000 for the same season, the estimated total value of the labour 
stolen from the worker’s community of origin would be at least about 3.5 million euros in one season.

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   151 25/06/2015   11:17:00



152 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

Moldova lost about 2 million euros per working day, about 3 per cent of the 
country’s annual GDP.*

In field research conducted in the United States in 2012, Zhang [21] esti-
mated 38,458 victims of labour trafficking violations in San Diego County, 
California, the vast majority of the victims being Mexican nationals. Even if 
in this case not all the victims suffered the same level of exploitation as in the 
Italian case, it gives an idea of the severity of the problem, and thus of its 
economic impact on the Mexican economy. 

According to a similar study conducted in Samut Sakhon province of Thai-
land [22], about 30 per cent of the migrants from Myanmar (probably about 
60,000  persons) may be victims of trafficking for forced labour, working 
under extremely exploitative conditions. Such situations have a devastating 
economic impact on the home communities of the victims. 

Conclusions

This article presents an analysis of the losses and gains in a situation of forced 
labour and in which conditions those losses and gains are more significant. 
Free labour and forced labour are compared on the basis of an analysis of the 
labour market. In the first case, the supply of and demand for labour can set 
working conditions according to the shape, inclination and size of the labour-
ers’ wishes and needs. In the second case, the demand for labour exploits the 
labourers who are forced to accept working conditions that they would other-
wise refuse. The author assesses the conditions under which these gains and 
losses change, thus qualifying the labour sectors that are more vulnerable to 
coerced labour, including trafficking in persons.

The article provides tools for measuring the opportunity costs and thus the 
economic losses of the labourer under exploitative working conditions, and 
the monetary gains of the exploiter and the trafficker in a situation of forced 
labour. These gains are in the form of lower costs for the employers and thus 
greater profits for the producers and dividends for the shareholders. The prof-
its feed the demand for forced labour, including trafficking in persons. To 
prevent such forms of exploitation, deterrents should be introduced to com-
pensate for such gains, in order to prevent human trafficking.

* According to the World Bank, the GDP of the Republic of Moldova in 2006 was about $2.988 million 
(http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD/countries).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   152 25/06/2015   11:17:00



Stealing labour: an economic analysis of forced labour and human trafficking 153

Trafficking in persons has a clear and quantifiable impact on the economic 
development of the countries of origin of the victims. Exploiters steal the 
most important productive factor of these countries—labour. Labour is quan-
tifiable and can be monetized. The author provides a tool for estimating the 
economic damage to these communities resulting from forced labour. The 
analysis shows that the impact of human trafficking is decisive in hindering 
proper economic development in countries affected by this crime. 

Finally, the author investigates one of the debated topics in the economics of 
slavery. The analysis shows that utilitarian social welfare is always greater in a 
situation with a free labour market than in a situation of forced labour. Not 
only do forced labour and human trafficking have an adverse economic 
impact on the victim and his or her community, but they result in society as a 
whole suffering economic losses.

References

 1. Gergana Danailova-Trainor and Patrick Belser, “Globalization and the illicit 
market for human trafficking: an empirical analysis of supply and demand”, Working 
Paper, No. 53 (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2006). 

 2. United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 39, No. 612. 

 3. Daron Acemoglu and Alexander Wolitzky, The Economics of Labor Coercion, 
NBER Working Paper, No. 15581 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, 2009). 

 4. United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2237, No. 39574.

 5. International Labour Organization, ILO Global Estimate of Forced Labour: Results 
and Methodology (Geneva, International Labour Office, 2012). 

 6. International Labour Organization, The Cost of Coercion: Global Report under the 
Follow-up to the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work (Geneva, 
International Labour Office, 2009). 

 7. Adam Smith, An Inquiry to the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations, 5th ed., 
Edwin Cannan, ed., vol. 1 (London, Methuen, 1904). 

 8. Achille Loria and A. Bouchard, “Les bases économiques de la constitution 
sociale”, Political Science Quarterly, vol. 8, No. 4 (n.d.), pp. 751-755. 

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   153 25/06/2015   11:17:00



154 FORUM ON CRIME AND SOCIETY, Volume 8, 2015

 9. Edward G. Wakefield, A View of the Art of Colonization with Present Reference to the 
British Empire: in Letters between a Statesman and a Colonist (New York, Cambridge 
University Press, 2010). 

10. Robert W. Fogel and Stanley L. Engerman, Time on the Cross: The Economics of 
American Negro Slavery (Boston, Little, Brown and Company, 1974). 

11. Evsey D. Domar, “The causes of slavery and serfdom: a hypothesis”, The Jour-
nal of Economic History, vol. 30, No. 1 (1970), pp. 18-32. 

12. Ted Bergstrom, “On the existence and optimality of competitive equilibrium for 
a slave economy”, The Review of Economic Studies, vol. 38, No. 1 (1971), pp. 23-36. 

13. Yoram Barzel, “An economic analysis of slavery”, Journal of Law and Economics, 
vol. 20, No. 1 (1977), pp. 87-110. 

14. Kaushik Basu, “One kind of power”, Oxford Economic Papers, vol. 38, No. 2 
(1986), pp. 259-282. 

15. Nadeem Naqvi and Frederick Wemhöner, “Power, coercion, and games land-
lords play”, Journal of Development Economics, vol. 47, No. 2 (1995), pp. 191-205. 

16. Hal R. Varian, Microeconomic Analysis, 3rd ed. (New York, W. W. Norton and 
Company, 1992). 

17. John R. Hicks, The Theory of Wages, 2nd ed. (London, Macmillan and Com-
pany, 1963), pp. 241-247. 

18. Alfred Marshall, Principles of Economics, 8th ed. (London, Macmillan and Com-
pany, 1920), pp. 518-538. 

19. “Polacchi al lavoro come sciavi scoperta tratta nel foggiano”, La Repubblica, 
19 July 2006. Available at www.repubblica.it/.

20. Fabrizio Gatti, “I was a slave in Puglia”, Wolfgang Achtner, transl., L’Espresso, 
4 September 2006. 

21. Sheldon X. Zhang, Looking for a Hidden Population: Trafficking of Migrant Labour-
ers in San Diego County (San Diego, California, San Diego State University, 2012). 

22. United Nations Inter-Agency Project on Human Trafficking, Estimating Labor 
Trafficking: a Study of Burmese Migrant Workers in Samut Sakhon, Thailand (Bangkok, 
2011).

15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   154 25/06/2015   11:17:00



15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   155 25/06/2015   11:17:00



15-00463_inner_E_ck_hk.indd   156 25/06/2015   11:17:00


