









































EHRC


motion. Accordingly, the Court does not discern
a link of causation between the domestic courts’
refusal to examine the merits of B.K.’s claim and
the expenses incurred by B.K.’s transport to
Switzerland and her suicide. Accordingly, the
Court does not make any award in this respect.

B. Costs and expenses
92. The applicant, who submitted documentary
evidence in support of his claim, sought a total of
EUR 46,490.91 for costs and expenses. This sum
comprised EUR 6,539.05 for lawyers’ fees and
expenses in the proceedings before the national
courts, as well as EUR 39,951.86 for lawyers’ fees
and expenses before this Court. He submitted that
he had agreed to pay his lawyer EUR 300 per hour.
93. The Government expressed their doubts as to
the necessity and appropriateness of the amount
claimed. They further pointed out that the applic-
ant had not submitted a written agreement on the
hourly rate he claimed.
94. According to the Court’s case law, an applicant
is entitled to the reimbursement of costs and ex-
penses only as far as it has been shown that these
have been actually and necessarily incurred and
are reasonable as to quantum. In the present case,
regard being had to the documents in its posses-
sion and the above criteria, the Court considers
it reasonable to award the claim for costs and ex-
penses in the domestic proceedings in full. Includ-
ing the costs of the administrative appeal proceed-
ings (EUR 197.20, see paragraphs 89 and 91
above), the Court awards the applicant the
amount of EUR 6,736.25 (including VAT) for the
proceedings before the domestic courts. Further
taking into account that the applicant’s complaints
before the Court were only partially successful,
the Court considers it reasonable to award the
sum of EUR 20,000 (including VAT) for the pro-
ceedings before the Court.

C. Default interest
95. The Court considers it appropriate that the
default interest rate should be based on the mar-
ginal lending rate of the European Central Bank,
to which should be added three percentage points.

For these reasons, the Court unanimously
1. Declares the applicant’s complaint about a viol-
ation of his wife’s Convention rights inadmissible;

2. Holds that there has been a violation of Article
8 of the Convention in that the domestic courts
refused to examine the merits of the applicant’s
motion;
3. Holds that it is not necessary to examine
whether there has been a violation of the applic-
ant’s right of access to a court under Article 6 § 1
of the Convention;
4. Holds
(a) that the respondent State is to pay the applic-
ant, within three months from the date on which
the judgment becomes final in accordance with
Article 44 § 2 of the Convention, the following
amounts:
(i) EUR 2,500 (two thousand five hundred euros),
plus any tax that may be chargeable, in respect of
non-pecuniary damage;
(ii) EUR 26,736.25 (twenty-six thousand seven
hundred thirty six euros and twenty five cents),
plus any tax that may be chargeable to the applic-
ant, in respect of costs and expenses;
(b) that from the expiry of the above-mentioned
three months until settlement simple interest shall
be payable on the above amounts at a rate equal
to the marginal lending rate of the European
Central Bank during the default period plus three
percentage points;
5. Dismisses the remainder of the applicant’s claim
for just satisfaction.

221
Europees Hof voor de Rechten van de Mens
31 juli 2012, nr. 40020/03
(Tulkens (President), Jočienė, Popović,
Berro-Lefèvre, Kalaydjieva, Sajó, Raimondi)
Noot mr. M. Boot-Matthijssen

Mensenhandel. Onmenselijke en vernederende
behandeling. Roma-huwelijk. Onderzoeks-
plicht. Gedwongen huwelijk? Valse aangifte.

[EVRM art. 3, 4, 14]

Deze zaak betreft onder meer vermeende mensen-
handel. De vier klagers, een Roma-familie, hebben
de Bulgaarse nationaliteit. Op 12 mei 2003 gingen
drie van de klagers, dochter M en haar ouders,
naar Milaan na een belofte van werk in de villa van
een man, een Roma van Servische origine (X). De
ouders van M stellen dat zij zes dagen later, mis-

2657European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



handeld en met de dood bedreigd, werden gedwon-
gen terug te keren naar Bulgarije en hun dochter
– destijds 17 jaar en dus minderjarig – achter
moesten laten in de villa. Dochter M zou onder
constante bewaking zijn gehouden, zij zou gedwon-
gen zijn om te stelen, zij zou zijn geslagen en met
de dood zijn bedreigd, en zij zou door Y, de neef
van X, herhaaldelijk zijn verkracht. Op 24 mei 2003
keerde de moeder terug naar Italië, met de
schoonzus van M – de vierde klager – en deed
aangifte onder meer van ontvoering van haar
dochter. Op 11 juni 2003 bestormde de Italiaanse
politie de villa en ontzette dochter M. Naar aanlei-
ding van verklaringen van onder meer M conclu-
deerde de Italiaanse aanklager vervolgens echter
dat geen sprake was van ontvoering, maar van een
overeengekomen huwelijk, gesloten tussen Y en
M. Deze conclusie werd volgens de Italiaanse
autoriteiten bevestigd door foto’s die na de inval
door X aan de politie waren overhandigd. Daarop
stond een trouwfeest waarop de vader van M een
som geld van X. overhandigd kreeg. In juli 2003
besloot het Italiaanse OM tot vervolging van
dochter M en haar moeder over te gaan vanwege
het doen van een valse aangifte waarin zij onder
meer hadden verklaard dat dochter M ontvoerd
was en zij onder dwang in de villa werd vastgehou-
den.
Op grond van art. 3 EVRM stellen de klagers voor
het EHRM dat de Italiaanse autoriteiten hebben
gefaald in het zorgen voor een snelle bevrijding
van M, dat verdere slechte behandeling door de
Servische familie in de villa zou hebben kunnen
voorkomen. Ook klagen zij dat het onderzoek dat
daarop volgde met betrekking tot hun aangiften
ineffectief was. Zij klagen ook op grond van art. 4
EVRM dat M – ook gedwongen om deel te nemen
aan georganiseerde misdaad, namelijk om te stelen
(een vorm van uitbuiting) – een slachtoffer van
mensenhandel was waarvoor zowel Bulgarije als
Italië verantwoordelijk zijn. De Italiaanse autoritei-
ten zouden deze gebeurtenissen niet adequaat
hebben onderzocht, zulks in strijd met art. 4 EVRM.
Tot slot klagen zij op grond van art. 14 EVRM dat
de behandeling van hun zaak in beide landen
vooringenomen was op grond van hun Roma-ori-
gine.
Het Hof komt niet tot het oordeel dat art. 3 EVRM
geschonden is wat betreft de door de Italiaanse
autoriteiten genomen maatregelen om dochter M
te bevrijden. Het Hof oordeelt echter wel dat de
Italiaanse autoriteiten de klacht dat M herhaaldelijk
was geslagen en verkracht in de villa, niet effectief
hebben onderzocht. Dit leidt tot constatering van
een schending van art. 3 EVRM. In dit verband –

bij de behandeling van art. 3 EVRM en niet art. 4
EVRM – overweegt het Hof dat de conclusie van
de Italiaanse autoriteiten dat het ging om een Ro-
ma-huwelijk niet voldoende is om alle twijfel weg
te nemen en geen reden is om die omstandigheden
niet verder te onderzoeken. Het Hof overweegt ook
dat de betaling van een geldsom op zich onvoldoen-
de is om te concluderen dat sprake is van mensen-
handel. Ook is er i.c. geen bewijs voor de stelling
dat zo’n verbintenis tot stand is gebracht met het
oogmerk van uitbuiting, seksueel of anderszins.
Het Hof oordeelt dat er geen reden is om aan te
nemen dat de verbintenis met een ander doel tot
stand is gekomen dan hetgeen in het algemeen
samenhangt met een traditioneel huwelijk. Het Hof
oordeelt voorts dat bewijs ontbreekt om de klacht
over mensenhandel, de vermeende criminele uit-
buiting, te ondersteunen. Er is niet genoeg bewijs
voor de omstandigheden die vallen onder art. 4
EVRM. Het Hof oordeelt tot slot dat de klacht op
grond van art. 14 EVRM tegen Italië, het discrimi-
natieverbod ongegrond is, ook voor zover sprake
zou zijn van dezelfde klacht tegen Bulgarije.

M. e.a.
tegen
Italië en Bulgarije

The Law

I. Preliminary objections

A. The Bulgarian and Italian Governments’
objection as to abuse of the right of petition
64. The Bulgarian Government considered that
there had been no violation in the present case
since the available evidence indicated that the
applicants’ stay in Italy had been voluntary, as
was the marriage in accordance with the related
ethnic rituals. Moreover, they considered the ap-
plication an abuse of petition in view of the incor-
rect and unjustifiable abusive language used by
the applicants’ representative in his submissions
to the Court.
65. The Italian Government did not submit spe-
cific reasons in respect of their objection.
66. The applicants submitted that they had been
subjected to violations of international law and
that both the Italian and Bulgarian authorities
had remained passive in the face of such events.
67. The Court recalls that, whilst the use of offens-
ive language in proceedings before it is un-
doubtedly inappropriate, an application may only

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122658

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



be rejected as abusive in extraordinary circum-
stances, for instance if it was knowingly based on
untrue facts (see, for example, Akdivar and Others
v. Turkey, 16 September 1996, Reports of Judg-
ments and Decisions 1996-IV, §§ 53-54; Varbanov
v. Bulgaria, no. 31365/96, § 36, ECHR 2000-X;
and Popov v. Moldova, no. 74153/01, § 49, 18
January 2005). Nevertheless, in certain exceptional
cases the persistent use of insulting or provocative
language by an applicant against the respondent
Government may be considered an abuse of the
right of petition within the meaning of Article 35
§ 3 of the Convention (see Duringer and Grunge
v. France (dec.), nos. 61164/00 and 18589/02,
ECHR 2003-II, and Chernitsyn v. Russia, no.
5964/02, § 25, 6 April 2006).
68. The Court considers that although some of
the applicants’ representative’s statements were
inappropriate, excessively emotive and regrettable,
they did not amount to circumstances of the kind
that would justify a decision to declare the applic-
ation inadmissible as an abuse of the right of peti-
tion (see Felbab v. Serbia, no. 14011/07, § 56, 14
April 2009). In so far as an application can be
found to be an abuse of the right of petition if it
is based on untrue facts, the Court notes that the
Italian domestic courts themselves considered
that it was difficult to decipher the facts and the
veracity of the situation (see paragraph 32 above).
In such circumstances, the Court cannot consider
that the version given by the applicants un-
doubtedly constitutes untrue facts.
69. It follows that the Governments’ plea must be
dismissed.

B. The Bulgarian and Italian Governments’ ob-
jection as to lack of victim status
70. The Bulgarian Government submitted that
there had been no transgression in the present
case. Moreover, the second, third and fourth ap-
plicants had no direct connection with the alleged
violations and were not directly or personally af-
fected by them. Furthermore, the fourth applicant
was not a next-of-kin of the first applicant but
only the third applicant’s daughter-in-law who
accompanied her to Italy.
71. The Italian Government submitted that the
second and fourth applicants did not have locus
standi in the proceedings since they had suffered
no damage as a result of the alleged violations.

72. The applicants submitted that violations had
indeed been committed and in consequence they
had victim status. Moreover, the second, third
and fourth applicants fell within the notion of
“victims of crime” according to Articles 1 and 2
of the Declaration of Basic Principles of Justice
for Victims of Crime and Abuse of Power (see
Relevant international texts above). They further
contended that all the applicants had suffered
prejudice in the form of physical ill-treatment at
the hands of the aggressors and moral damage in
the light of the authorities’ inaction, while the
second, third and fourth applicants had been try-
ing their best to protect the first applicant. This
was evident particularly in so far as it concerned
the parents of the first applicant.
73. The Court considers that the Governments’
objection mainly relates to the second, third and
fourth applicants in so far as they claim that they
are themselves victims of violations of the Con-
vention in respect of the first applicant’s alleged
subjection to trafficking in human beings and in-
human and degrading treatment at the hands of
third parties.
74. The Court recalls that under Article 3, in re-
spect of disappearance cases, whether a family
member is a victim will depend on the existence
of special factors which give the suffering of the
applicant a dimension and character distinct from
the emotional distress which may be regarded as
inevitably caused to relatives of a victim of a seri-
ous human rights violation. Relevant elements
will include the proximity of the family tie – in
that context, a certain weight will attach to the
parent-child bond –, the particular circumstances
of the relationship, the extent to which the family
member witnessed the events in question, the in-
volvement of the family member in the attempts
to obtain information about the disappeared per-
son and the way in which the authorities respon-
ded to those enquiries. In these cases the essence
of such a violation does not so much lie in the fact
of the “disappearance” of the family member but
rather concerns the authorities’ reactions and at-
titudes to the situation when it is brought to their
attention. It is especially in respect of the latter
that a relative may claim directly to be a victim of
the authorities’ conduct (see, Kurt v. Turkey, 25
May 1998, §§ 130-134, Reports 1998 III; Timurtaş
v. Turkey, no. 23531/94, §§ 91-98, ECHR 2000
VI; İpek v. Turkey, no. 25760/94, §§ 178-183,

2659European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



ECHR 2004 II (extracts); and conversely, Çakıcı
v. Turkey [GC], no. 23657/94, § 99, ECHR 1999
IV).
75. The Court has also exceptionally considered
that relatives had victim status of their own in
situations where there was not a distinct long-
lasting period during which they sustained uncer-
tainty, anguish and distress characteristic to the
specific phenomenon of disappearances but where
the corpses of the victims had been dismembered
and decapitated and where the applicants had
been unable to bury the dead bodies of their loved
ones in a proper manner, which according to the
Court in itself must have caused them profound
and continuous anguish and distress. The Court
thus considered that in the specific circumstances
of such cases the moral suffering endured by the
applicants had reached a dimension and character
distinct from the emotional distress which may
be regarded as inevitably caused to relatives of a
victim of a serious human rights violation (see,
Khadzhialiyev and Others v. Russia, no. 3013/04,
§ 121, 6 November 2008 and Akpınar and Altun
v. Turkey, no. 56760/00, § 86, 27 February 2007).
76. In this light, the Court considers that, although
they witnessed some of the events in question,
and were, each to a different extent, involved in
the attempts to obtain information about the first
applicant, the second, third and fourth applicants
cannot be considered as victims themselves of the
violations relating to the treatment of the first
applicant and the investigations in that respect,
since the moral suffering endured by them cannot
be said to have reached a dimension and character
distinct from the emotional distress which may
be regarded as inevitably caused to relatives of a
victim of a serious human rights violation.
77. The Court notes that this conclusion does not
run contrary to the findings in the Rantsev case
(Rantsev v. Cyprus and Russia, no. 25965/04, 7
January 2010) since, in the present case, unlike in
the Rantsev case, the first applicant who was sub-
ject to the alleged violations is not deceased and
is a party to the current proceedings.
78. It follows that the Governments’ objection in
respect of the second, third and fourth applicants’
victim status in relation to the complaints under
Articles 3 and 4 of the Convention in respect of
which the first applicant is the direct victim, in-
cluding the alleged lack of an investigation in that
respect, must be upheld.

79. Moreover, the Court considers that the fourth
applicant cannot claim to be a direct victim of any
of the alleged violations, while the second applic-
ant can only claim to be a victim in respect of the
treatment to which he was himself allegedly sub-
jected by the Serbian family. As regards the third
applicant in respect of the alleged ill-treatment
she suffered at the hands of the Serbian family in
Ghislarengo and the police, the Court considers
that there is no element which at this stage could
deprive her of victim status.
80. It follows that the Governments’ objection in
relation to the fourth applicant in respect of all
the complaints and to the second applicant, except
in relation to the complaint about the treatment
to which he was allegedly subjected by the Serbian
family, must be upheld, whereas it must be dis-
missed in relation to the remaining complaints.
81. Accordingly, those complaints in respect of
which the objection was upheld are incompatible
ratione personae with the provisions of the Con-
vention within the meaning of Article 35 § 3 and
must be rejected in accordance with Article 35
§ 4.

C. The Bulgarian Government’s objection as to
non-exhaustion of domestic remedies
82. The Bulgarian Government submitted that
the applicants had had the opportunity to bring
proceedings in relation to the alleged offences.
According to Articles 4 and 5 of the Bulgarian
Penal Code, proceedings could have been brought
against alien subjects who had committed crimes
abroad against Bulgarian nationals even if such
prosecution had already taken place in another
State. Moreover, the applicants could have sought
redress under the State Liability for Damage
caused to Citizens Act, which was in force at the
relevant time and provided that the State was li-
able for damage caused to citizens by illegal acts,
actions or omissions of authorities and officials
during or in connection with the performance of
administrative activities. Furthermore, the applic-
ants could also have sought redress under the
general provisions of the Obligations and Con-
tracts Act.
83. The applicants submitted that they had sent
letters to the Prime Minister and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and complained to the Embassy
of Bulgaria in Rome, which should have enabled
the Bulgarian authorities to take action in accord-
ance with Article 174 (2) of the Code of Criminal

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122660

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



Procedure. Moreover, according to Bulgarian law,
if a complaint reached an organ which was not
competent to deal with the matter it was for that
organ to transfer the request to the competent
authority. As to an action under the State Liability
for Damage caused to Citizens Act, the applicants
considered that such an action would not be ap-
propriate since no body had informed them of
the means available to safeguard their rights under
Article 3 of the same text.
84. For reasons which appear below in respect of
the complaints against the Bulgarian State, the
Court does not consider it necessary to examine
whether the applicants have exhausted all available
domestic remedies as regards their complaints
against Bulgaria and consequently leaves this
matter open (see, mutatis mutandis, Zarb v.
Malta, no. 16631/04, § 45, 4 July 2006).

II. Alleged violations of Article 3 of the Conven-
tion
85. The applicants complained that the first applic-
ant had suffered ill-treatment (including sexual
abuse together with a subjection to forced labour),
as had to a lesser extent the second and third ap-
plicants at the hands of the Roma family in Ghis-
larengo, and that the authorities (especially the
Public Prosecutor in Vercelli) had failed to invest-
igate the events adequately. They also complained
that the first and third applicants had been ill-
treated by Italian police officers during their
questioning. Thus, the Italian and Bulgarian au-
thorities’ actions and omissions were contrary to
Article 3 of the Convention, which reads as fol-
lows:
“No one shall be subjected to torture or to inhu-
man or degrading treatment or punishment.”

A. The complaints concerning the lack of ade-
quate steps to prevent the first applicant’s ill-
treatment by the Serbian family by securing her
swift release and the lack of an effective investi-
gation into that alleged ill-treatment

1. The parties’ observations

(a) The applicants
86. The applicants insisted that their version of
events was faithful and that the Governments’
submissions were entirely based on the witness
statements of X., Y. and Z., which were contradict-
ory and untruthful. One such example was the

fact that X., Y. and Z.’s testimony did not corres-
pond in respect of the venue where the alleged
wedding celebrations had taken place. They also
contended that any slight discrepancies in the first
applicant’s testimony could only have been due
to her anxiety as a result of the threats and ill-
treatment she had been suffering. They further
reiterated that the photos used as evidence had
been obtained under threat and that the second
applicant had been repeatedly beaten and forced
at gun-point to pose in the said pictures. They
also argued that the first applicant had been to
discotheques and travelled in cars only within the
ambit of the planning and actual robberies she
was forced to participate in by the Serbian family.
As to any medical records, they considered it was
for the authorities to provide such materials.
87. In their view, the first applicant had clearly
suffered a violation of Article 3 following the
treatment she had endured at the hands of the
Serbian family, in relation to which no effective
investigation had been undertaken to establish
the facts and prosecute the offenders.
88. The Italian authorities took seventeen days to
free the first applicant, who was found to be in
bad shape both physically and mentally. This
notwithstanding, no medical examinations were
carried out on the first applicant to establish the
extent of her injuries. Indeed, to date, the truth
had not been established and various items of
evidence had been disregarded. The minutes of
the search of the villa were incomplete, the sub-
stantial amounts of money seized during the raid
had not been described, and certain facts had not
been examined, such as the finding of multiple
passports in the same name. Neither had the in-
vestigation examined the first applicant’s claim
that she had been repeatedly raped by Y. while
having her hands and feet tied to the bed. Nor
had any research been done to establish the
criminal records of the Serbian family, whose only
means of income were the recurring robberies
they organised, or in relation to the events, namely
the promise of work which had led the applicants
to move to Italy. It was evident in their view that
the investigation had left room for dissimulation
of the facts.
89. Furthermore, the applicants were not allowed
access to the investigation file, no translations of
the questioning were given to them, and no wit-
ness testimony by letters rogatory was taken from

2661European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



the applicants when they returned to Bulgaria, to
enable the authorities to correctly establish the
facts.

(b) The Italian Government
90. The Italian Government submitted that the
facts as alleged by the applicants had been entirely
disproved during domestic proceedings on the
basis of documentary evidence. Moreover, they
noted that one of the medical documents men-
tioned in the facts had not been transmitted to
them and the other document had no bearing on
the case. As to the injury to the first applicant’s
rib, they noted that the third applicant in her
complaint to the police in Turin had claimed that
the first applicant had had a similar injury which
dated back to a prior accident.
91. They noted that criminal investigations for
the alleged kidnapping of the first applicant had
been initiated immediately following the third
applicant’s oral complaints to the police of Turin
on 24 May 2003. The Government submitted that
it took the authorities until 11 June 2003 to locate
the villa where the first applicant was being held
(since the third applicant had only provided a
vague indication of the premises), to identify the
occupants of the villa (no one officially resided
there), to observe the happenings in the location
and to make preparations for the necessary action
leading to the arrest of the occupants and the re-
lease of the first applicant without casualties, as
the third applicant had alleged that arms were
held there.
92. The immediate investigation and arrest which
ensued had shown a reality different from that
announced by the third applicant in her initial
complaint. It appeared that the first applicant had
married Y. according to the customs and tradi-
tions of their ethnic group, for the price of EUR
11,000. This was evident from a number of photos
which had been found at the venue, showing a
wedding ceremony in which the first three applic-
ants had participated and where, together with
Y., they appeared contented and relaxed. Further
photos showed the second applicant receiving
money from Y.’s relatives. The conclusion that
this consisted of a payment for the bride according
to Roma customs and not a kidnapping was even
more evident in the light of the numerous contra-
dictions in the first and third applicants’ testimon-
ies, together with the first applicant’s admission
of a marriage contract. Moreover, no firearms

were found during the raid, which disproved the
third applicant’s allegation that they had been
threatened by means of a firearm.
93. The Italian Government submitted that this
version of events had been considered truthful by
the judgment of the Turin Investigating Magis-
trate of 26 January 2005. It had also been con-
sidered probable by the Turin Tribunal in its
judgment of 8 February 2006, which according
to the Government’s interpretation, concluded
that the problem was mainly an economic disagree-
ment in relation to the marriage contract con-
cluded. It was very probable that the marriage
contract had not been respected either because of
an economic disagreement or because of the
treatment of the first applicant following the
marriage, which she had related to the third ap-
plicant over the phone. The Government reiter-
ated that Roma marriages were specific, as had
been accepted by the Court in Muñoz Díaz v.
Spain (no. 49151/07, ECHR 2009).
94. They further submitted that the investigation
had been carried out immediately and without
unnecessary delay and the judicial authorities had
not spared any efforts to establish the facts. The
scene of the events was isolated and preserved;
relevant objects were identified and seized; the
occupants of the premises were identified and
arrested, and the first applicant was lodged in
Caritas premises; the relevant actors and witnesses
including the applicants were immediately heard
and they were assisted by interpreters, lawyers
and psychological experts. Having considered all
the above, the judicial authorities had found it
more likely that there had been a marriage con-
tract. The Italian Government considered that in
view of the evidence, it could not have been con-
cluded otherwise. They further noted that it was
not for the Court to establish the facts of the case,
unless this was inevitable given the special circum-
stances, which was not so in the present case. In-
deed, as had been proved by the Government, the
official investigation had been carried out in
depth, as shown by its detailed conclusions.
95. The Italian Government submitted that in the
eighteen days between 24 May and 11 June 2003
the third applicant had the status of a witness and
had access to the information collected during
the investigation to a degree which sufficed to al-
low her an effective participation in the procedure.

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122662

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



From 11 June 2003 onwards the first and third
applicants had the status of accused, in relation
to which the invoked provisions had no bearing.

2. The Court’s assessment

(a) Admissibility
96. The Court notes that it is confronted with a
dispute over the exact nature of the alleged events.
In this regard, it considers that it must reach its
decision on the basis of the evidence submitted
by the parties (see Menteşe and Others v. Turkey,
no. 36217/97, § 70, 18 January 2005).
97. The Court considers that the medical records
in respect of the first applicant dated 22 and 24
June 2003, submitted to the Court at the time of
the lodging of the application (see paragraph 18
above), both transferred to the Government on 1
March 2010 and appearing on their secure site,
even though not submitted to the investigating
authorities, constitute sufficient prima facie evid-
ence that the first applicant may have been subjec-
ted to some form of ill-treatment. In the specific
circumstances of the case, the latter, together with
the uncontested fact that a complaint was lodged
with the authorities on 24 May 2003 giving a de-
tailed account of the facts complained of, provides
enough basis for the Court to consider that the
complaint is not manifestly ill-founded within the
meaning of Article 35 § 3 (a) of the Convention.
98. It further notes that it is not inadmissible on
any other grounds. It must therefore be declared
admissible.

(b) Merits

i. General principles
99. The Court reiterates that Article 3 enshrines
one of the most fundamental values of democratic
society. It prohibits in absolute terms torture or
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
The obligation on High Contracting Parties under
Article 1 of the Convention to secure to everyone
within their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms
defined in the Convention, taken in conjunction
with Article 3, requires States to take measures
designed to ensure that individuals within their
jurisdiction are not subjected to torture or inhu-
man or degrading treatment, including such ill-
treatment administered by private individuals
(see A. v. the United Kingdom, 23 September 1998,
§ 22, Reports 1998-VI). These measures should

provide effective protection, in particular, of
children and other vulnerable persons and include
reasonable steps to prevent ill-treatment of which
the authorities had or ought to have had know-
ledge (see Z and Others v. the United Kingdom
[GC], no. 29392/95, § 73, ECHR 2001 V).
100. The Court reiterates that Article 3 of the
Convention requires the authorities to investigate
allegations of ill-treatment when they are “argu-
able” and “raise a reasonable suspicion”, even if
such treatment is administered by private individu-
als (see Ay v. Turkey, no. 30951/96, §§ 59-60, 22
March 2005, and Mehmet Ümit Erdem v. Turkey,
no. 42234/02, § 26, 17 July 2008). The minimum
standards applicable, as defined by the Court’s
case-law, include the requirements that the invest-
igation be independent, impartial and subject to
public scrutiny, and that the competent authorit-
ies act with exemplary diligence and promptness
(see, for example, Çelik and İmret v. Turkey, no.
44093/98, § 55, 26 October 2004). In addition, for
an investigation to be considered effective, the
authorities must take whatever reasonable steps
they can to secure the evidence concerning the
incident, including, inter alia, a detailed statement
concerning the allegations from the alleged victim,
eyewitness testimony, forensic evidence and,
where appropriate, additional medical reports
(see, in particular, Batı and Others v. Turkey, nos.
33097/96 and 57834/00, § 134, ECHR 2004-IV
(extracts)).

ii. Application to the present case
101. The Court notes that the third applicant’s
complaint lodged on 24 May 2003 was not suppor-
ted by any medical records. However, the Court
considers that this was logical and that medical
evidence could not be expected given that accord-
ing to that complaint the first applicant was being
retained against her will by the Serbian family. In
these circumstances, the Court considers that the
third applicant’s testimony and the seriousness
of the allegations made in the complaint lodged
on 24 May 2003 raised a reasonable suspicion that
the first applicant could have been subjected to
ill-treatment as alleged. This suffices to attract the
applicability of Article 3 of the Convention.

(a) The steps taken by the Italian authorities
102. As regards the steps taken by the Italian au-
thorities, the Court notes that the police released
the first applicant from her alleged captivity

2663European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



within two and a half weeks. It took them three
days to locate the villa and a further two weeks to
prepare the raid which led to the first applicant’s
release. Bearing in mind that the applicants had
claimed that the Serbian family was armed, the
Court can accept that prior surveillance was ne-
cessary. Therefore, in its view, the intervention
complied with the requirement of promptness
and diligence with which the authorities should
act in such circumstances.
103. It follows that the State authorities fulfilled
their positive obligation of protecting the first
applicant. There has therefore been no violation
of Article 3 under this head.

(b) The investigation
104. As to the investigation following the first
applicant’s release, the Court notes that the Italian
authorities questioned X., Y., Z., the first applicant
and the third applicant. It does not appear that
any other efforts were made to question any third
parties who could have witnessed the events at
issue. Indeed, the Italian authorities considered
that the photos collected at the venue corrobor-
ated the alleged assailants’ version of events.
However, none of the other people in the photos
was ever identified or questioned, a step which
the Court considers was essential, given that the
applicants maintained that they had been forced
at gun-point to pose for such photos. Nor were
any attempts made to hear the second applicant,
who had been a major actor in the events at issue.
Indeed, the Court notes that on the same day that
the first applicant was released and heard, the
criminal proceedings which had been instituted
against the assailants were turned into criminal
proceedings against the first and third applicants
(see paragraph 25 above). The Court is struck by
the fact that following the first applicant’s release
it took the authorities less than a full day to reach
their conclusions. In this light it stood to reason
that the Turin Criminal Court considered it im-
possible to establish the facts clearly (see para-
graph 32 above).
105. The Court also notes that, when released, the
first applicant was not subject to a medical exam-
ination, notwithstanding the claims that she had
been repeatedly beaten and raped. The Court
further notes that even assuming that it was true
that the events at issue amounted to a marriage
in accordance with the Roma traditions, it was
still alleged that in the month the first applicant

stayed in Ghislarengo she had been beaten and
forced to have sexual intercourse with Y. The
Court notes that State authorities must take pro-
tective measures in the form of effective de-
terrence against serious breaches of an individual’s
personal integrity also by a husband (see Opuz v.
Turkey, no. 33401/02, §§ 160-176, 9 June 2009)
or partner. It follows that any such allegation
should also have required an investigation. How-
ever, no particular questioning took place in this
respect, nor was any other test undertaken,
whether strictly medical or merely scientific. It is
of even greater concern that the first applicant
was a minor at the time of the events at issue. In-
deed, the Convention requires effective deterrence
against grave acts such as rape, and children and
other vulnerable individuals, in particular, are
entitled to effective protection (see, mutatis
mutandis, M.C. v. Bulgaria, no. 39272/98, § 150,
ECHR 2003 XII). However, the Italian authorities
chose not to investigate this aspect of the com-
plaint.
106. Moreover, the Court notes that the applicants
alleged that they had moved to Italy following a
promise of work, although none ensued, and that
the first applicant was threatened and forced to
participate in robberies and private sexual activit-
ies during the period of time she remained in
Ghislarengo. While this has not been established,
the Court cannot exclude that the circumstances
of the present case, as reported by the first applic-
ant to the Italian authorities (see paragraph 8
above), had they been proved, could have
amounted to human trafficking as defined in in-
ternational conventions (see Relevant Internation-
al Texts above), which undoubtedly also amounts
to inhuman and degrading treatment under Art-
icle 3 of the Convention. In consequence, the
Italian authorities had an obligation to look into
the matter and to establish all the relevant facts
by means of an appropriate investigation which
required that this aspect of the complaint be also
examined and scrutinized. This was not so, the
Italian authorities having opined that the circum-
stances of the present case fell within the context
of a Roma marriage. The Court cannot share the
view that such a conclusion sufficed to remove
any doubt that the circumstances of the case re-
vealed an instance of human trafficking which
required a particularly thorough investigation
inter alia because a possible “Roma marriage”
cannot be used as a reason not to investigate in

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122664

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



the circumstances. Furthermore, the Court ob-
serves that the rapid decision of the Italian author-
ities not to proceed to a thorough investigation
had, among other things, the consequence that
medical evidence on the physical condition of the
first applicant was not even sought.
107. In conclusion, the Court considers that the
above elements suffice to demonstrate that, in the
particular circumstances of this case, the investig-
ation into the first applicant’s alleged ill-treatment
by private individuals was not effective under
Article 3 of the Convention.
108. There has therefore been a procedural viola-
tion of Article 3.

B. The complaint regarding the second and
third applicant’s ill-treatment at the hands of
the Roma family and the lack of an effective in-
vestigation by the Italian authorities in this
respect

1. The parties’ observations
109. The applicants complained that the second
and third applicants had also suffered ill-treat-
ment and threats at the hands of the Serbian
family. In particular, the second applicant had
been repeatedly beaten and forced at gun-point
to pose in the “wedding” pictures. However, the
Italian authorities took no steps to question the
second applicant as a victim of ill-treatment and
threats, as a result of which they claimed he had
been declared 100% invalid by the Vidin Medical
Commission on 5 October 2010 (the applicants
acknowledged that they had not submitted docu-
ments in proof of this). As a result of the stress
and anxiety caused, the second applicant had been
diagnosed with diabetes shortly after the events
at issue.
110. The Italian Government submitted that
criminal investigations in respect of threats
against and injuries to the second and third applic-
ants had been initiated immediately following the
third applicant’s oral complaints to the police of
Turin on 24 May 2003. However, it had not resul-
ted from the investigation that their complaints
were truthful. According to the Government, it
was strange that the second and third applicants
claimed to have been beaten on 18 May 2003 and
yet they decided to go back to Bulgaria. Further-
more, no medical documents substantiating this
claim had been submitted and no firearms had

been found during the raid at the villa, which
disproved the allegation that they had been
threatened at gun-point.

2. The Court’s assessment
111. According to the Court’s case-law, allegations
of ill-treatment must be supported by appropriate
evidence. To assess this evidence, the Court adopts
the standard of proof “beyond reasonable doubt”,
although such proof may follow from the coexist-
ence of sufficiently strong, clear and concordant
inferences or of similar unrebutted presumptions
of fact (see Ireland v. the United Kingdom, 18
January 1978, Series A no. 25, § 161 in fine; and
Medova v. Russia, no. 25385/04, § 116, ECHR
2009 ....).
112. The Court notes that, even assuming that the
second and third applicants had been previously
kept under constraint, it is uncontested that this
was no longer so after 18 May 2003. It follows that
the second and third applicants, unlike in the case
of the first applicant, could have sought medical
assistance and acquired medical evidence in sup-
port of their claims. However, they did not
provide the authorities with any form of medical
report to accompany the complaint lodged by the
third applicant on 24 May 2003. Moreover, to
date, no evidence has been submitted to the Court
indicating that the second and third applicants
could have been subjected to ill-treatment at the
hands of the Serbian family. In this light, the
Court considers that there is no sufficient, consist-
ent or reliable evidence to establish to the neces-
sary degree of proof that they were subjected to
such ill-treatment.
113. In consequence, the authorities were not
given a reasonable cause for suspecting that the
second and third applicants had been subjected
to improper treatment, which would have re-
quired a fully fledged investigation.
114. It follows that the complaint is manifestly ill-
founded and must be rejected in accordance with
Article 35 §§ 3 and 4 of the Convention.

C. The complaint regarding the first and third
applicants’ ill-treatment at the hands of the po-
lice officers during their questioning
115. The first and third applicants complained
about ill-treatment during their interrogation,
namely that they were not provided with lawyers
and interpreters during that time and that they
were forced to sign documents the content of

2665European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



which they had not understood. They further
complained about the criminal proceedings with
which they were threatened and which were
eventually instituted against them, noting that
they had only been taken up in order for the au-
thorities to apply pressure on them. They also
contended that subsequently the court-appointed
lawyer failed to safeguard their interests during
the questioning, notably by failing to request that
the Serbian family be kept outside the room, by
not ensuring adequate interpreters and treatment
without threats and most gravely by allowing the
first applicant to be kept in a cell for hours follow-
ing her questioning.
116. The Court firstly notes that the first and third
applicants failed to press charges against any al-
leged offenders from the police force. No official
complaint has ever been lodged with the Italian
authorities in respect of this alleged ill-treatment.
Neither has it been submitted that they attempted
to make such a complaint in the context of the
proceedings eventually instituted against them.
It follows that the first and third applicants failed
to exhaust domestic remedies in respect of this
complaint.
117. Furthermore, the Court notes that the treat-
ment described by the applicants does not attain
the minimum level of severity to make it fall
within the scope of Article 3. In particular, the
Court considers that the fact that the first and
third applicants were warned about the possibility
of being prosecuted and imprisoned if they did
not tell the truth may be considered to be part of
the normal duties of the authorities when ques-
tioning an individual, and not an unlawful threat.
Moreover, according to the documents submitted
by the Italian Government, an interpreter or a
lawyer or both accompanied the first and third
applicants during the different stages of the inter-
rogation.
118. For these reasons, this complaint must be
rejected as being manifestly ill-founded, pursuant
to Article 35 §§ 3 and 4 of the Convention

D. The complaint regarding the lack of action
and an effective investigation into the alleged
events against Bulgaria

1. The parties’ observations
119. In respect of Bulgaria, the applicants com-
plained about the delay in the treatment of the
second applicant’s complaint of 31 May 2003 by

the consular authorities. It took the authorities
two days to take action in respect of the com-
plaint, following the applicants’ representative’s
aggressive criticisms. They contended that the
Bulgarian Government had failed to explain in
what way the CRD had assisted the applicants in
their interests as required by Article 32 of the
Regulations of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Indeed, they had not interfered in the choice of
interpreters (who remained silent in the face of
the treatment suffered by the two applicants dur-
ing interrogation) or the court-appointed lawyer,
nor had a consular representative been present
during the questioning.
120. Similarly, no information had been submitted
and nothing had been done by the Bulgarian au-
thorities to repatriate the applicants and the Na-
tional agency for the protection of infants had not
been informed in order for it to be able to take
the necessary measures. Neither had the Ministry
or the Embassy of Bulgaria in Rome informed the
Prosecutor’s Office in Bulgaria, which could have
undertaken proceedings against the Serbian fam-
ily. Moreover, the Bulgarian authorities had not
informed the Italian authorities that according to
Bulgarian law a marriage of a minor Bulgarian
national, celebrated abroad, required the prior
authorisation of the Bulgarian diplomatic or
consular representative (Articles 12, 13 and 131
of the Bulgarian Family Code). In the present case
no such request was made or granted. This require-
ment was valid for all Bulgarian citizens irrespect-
ive of their ethnicity and in any case ethnic tradi-
tions could not set aside the law.
121. The Bulgarian Government contended that
in the absence of any specific allegation of any
treatment contrary to Article 3 there could not be
a violation of that provision. Moreover, any pos-
itive obligations on their part could only arise in
respect of actions committed or ongoing in Bul-
garian territory.
122. Without prejudice to the above, the Bulgarian
Government submitted that the Ministry of For-
eign Affairs, the CRD, the Ambassador and the
Consul in Rome immediately reacted when noti-
fied of the case. They established contact with the
Italian authorities and specified that the alleged
victim was a minor and was being held against
her will. The Bulgarian Ambassador maintained
constant communication with the Italian author-
ities and transferred the information to the second
applicant, who had expressed his gratitude in this

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122666

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



respect. The fact that adequate and comprehensive
measures had been taken by the Bulgarian CRD
was also evident from the consular file in relation
to the case, which was submitted to the Court.
That file contained more than a hundred pages
and, on 2 June 2003, it had been sent to the Em-
bassy of Bulgaria in Rome with the instruction to
take immediate action in cooperation with the
Italian authorities for the release of the first applic-
ant and her return to Bulgaria.
123. The second applicant again solicited the
Bulgarian authorities on 11 June 2003 and the
CRD again referred to the Embassy of Bulgaria
in Rome on the same day. In turn the Embassy
replied that the provincial unit of the carabinieri
in Turin and the central management of the Ver-
celli Police had conducted a successful action to
release the first applicant from the house; she was
found to be in good condition and was under the
protection of the public authorities. This inform-
ation was immediately forwarded to the second
applicant. By a letter dated 24 June 2003 the Bul-
garian Embassy in Rome notified the CRD that,
following a request by the second applicant, in-
formation had been received from the Head Office
of the Criminal Police of Italy to the effect that
the result of the inquiry and declaration of the
first applicant indicated that her father had re-
ceived money for a forthcoming wedding and
therefore there were no grounds to institute
criminal proceedings against the Serbian family.
They further noted that the judicial authorities
were considering the possibility of bringing pro-
ceedings against the first and third applicants for
libel and perjury. The second applicant was in-
formed of this by a letter of 1 July 2003. Sub-
sequently correspondence was maintained
between the Consular Section and the applicants
and their representative, as well as with the Italian
authorities. Thus, within their competence, the
Bulgarian authorities had been fully cooperative.

2. The Court’s assessment
124. The Court reiterates that the engagement
undertaken by a Contracting State under Article
1 of the Convention is confined to “securing”
(“reconnaître” in the French text) the listed rights
and freedoms to persons within its own “jurisdic-
tion” (see Soering v. the United Kingdom, 7 July
1989, § 86, Series A no. 161). The Court’s case-
law has defined various instances where the
Convention provisions, read in conjunction with

the State’s general duty under Article 1, impose
an obligation on States to carry out a thorough
and effective investigation (see for example Ay v.
Turkey, cited above, §§ 59-60; Aksoy v. Turkey,
18 December 1996, § 98, Reports 1996-VI, and
Assenov and Others v. Bulgaria, 28 October 1998,
§ 102, Reports 1998-VIII). However, in each case
the State’s obligation applied only in relation to
ill-treatment allegedly committed within its juris-
diction (see Al-Adsani v. the United Kingdom
[GC], no. 35763/97, § 38, ECHR 2001-XI, where
the Court did not uphold the applicant’s claim
that the Convention required the United Kingdom
to assist one of its citizens in obtaining an effective
remedy for torture against another State since it
had not been contended that the alleged torture
took place in the jurisdiction of the United King-
dom or that the United Kingdom authorities had
any causal connection with its occurrence).
125. Similarly, in Rantsev v. Cyprus and Russia
(no. 25965/04, §§ 243-247, ECHR 2010 (extracts)),
the Court noted that the direct victim’s death had
taken place in Cyprus. Accordingly, since it could
not be shown that there were special features in
that case which required a departure from the
general approach, the obligation to ensure an ef-
fective official investigation applied to Cyprus
alone. Notwithstanding that Ms Rantseva was a
Russian national, the Court concluded that there
was no free-standing obligation incumbent on
the Russian authorities under Article 2 of the
Convention to investigate.
126. It follows from the above that in the circum-
stances of the present case, where the alleged ill-
treatment occurred on Italian territory and where
the Court has already found that it was for the
Italian authorities to investigate the events, there
cannot be said to have been an obligation on the
part of the Bulgarian authorities to carry out an
investigation under Article 3 of the Convention.
127. Moreover, the Convention organs have re-
peatedly stated that the Convention does not
contain a right which requires a High Contracting
Party to exercise diplomatic protection, or espouse
an applicant’s complaints under international law
or otherwise to intervene with the authorities of
another State on his or her behalf (see for ex-
ample, Kapas v the United Kingdom, no. 12822/87,
Commission decision of 9 December 1987, De-
cision and Reports (DR) 54, L. v Sweden, no.
12920/87, Commission decision of 13 December
1988, and Dobberstein v Germany, no. 25045/94,

2667European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



Commission decision of 12 April 1996 and the
decisions cited therein). Nevertheless, the Court
notes that the Bulgarian authorities repeatedly
pressed for action by the Italian authorities, as
explained by the Bulgarian Government in their
submissions and as shown from the documents
submitted to the Court.
128. In conclusion, the Court considers that this
complaint is manifestly ill-founded and must be
rejected in accordance with Article 35 §§ 3 and 4
of the Convention.

III. Alleged violation of Article 4 of the Conven-
tion
129. The applicants contended that the treatment
the first applicant had suffered at the hands of the
Serbian family and the fact that she was forced to
take part in organised crime constituted a viola-
tion of Article 4. According to the applicants, the
violation of the said provision also arose in rela-
tion to the entire facts of the case which clearly
concerned trafficking in human beings and was
contrary to that provision, which reads as follows:
“1. No one shall be held in slavery or servitude.
2. No one shall be required to perform forced or
compulsory labour.
3. For the purpose of this article the term ‘forced
or compulsory labour’ shall not include:
(a) any work required to be done in the ordinary
course of detention imposed according to the
provisions of Article 5 of [the] Convention or
during conditional release from such detention;
(b) any service of a military character or, in case
of conscientious objectors in countries where they
are recognised, service exacted instead of compuls-
ory military service;
(c) any service exacted in case of an emergency
or calamity threatening the life or well-being of
the community;
(d) any work or service which forms part of nor-
mal civic obligations.”

A. The parties’ submissions

1. The applicants
130. The applicants noted that they had been led
to believe that they would find work, but to the
contrary the first applicant had been forced to
steal and had suffered corporeal injuries as a result
of the treatment she received, as proved by the
medical documents submitted. They considered
that, given the deceit by which they had been

persuaded to move to Italy and the ensuing
treatment suffered, particularly by the first applic-
ant, the case undoubtedly concerned trafficking
in human beings within the meaning of interna-
tional treaties. They were of the view that both
States were responsible for the alleged violation.
It was degrading that the Governments were try-
ing to cover up their failings by hiding behind the
excuse of Roma customs, which had clearly not
been the case, as repeatedly stated by the applic-
ants. Moreover, the applicants failed to under-
stand how the authorities considered that Roma
traditions, which clearly amounted to a violation
of the criminal law (see sections 177-78 and 190-
91 of the Bulgarian Criminal Code, relevant do-
mestic law above), could be overlooked and con-
sidered normal.
131. In respect of their complaint against Italy
they reiterated their submissions put forward
under Article 3.
132. In respect of Bulgaria, the applicants also re-
iterated their submissions under Article 3. They
further noted that even though in Bulgaria a law
against human trafficking had been enacted, in
practice this had no effect. In fact, the Bulgarian
Government had not been able to submit any
statistics as to the number of people having been
prosecuted under the Criminal Code provisions
in this respect. As to prevention, the applicants
contended that the Bulgarian Government should
have been able to spot the dangers a family like
the applicants would have faced when deciding
to move to Italy following a suspicious promise
of work. They insisted that no relevant questions
had been set to the applicants at the border as
though a risk for trafficking could have never ex-
isted.

2. The Italian Government
133. The Italian Government submitted that in
the third applicant’s complaint to the Turin Police
of 24 May 2003 there had been no allegation of
forced labour of human trafficking, but only a
fear that the first applicant could be forced into
prostitution. They considered that the Trafficking
Convention could not come to play in the circum-
stances of the case as established by the domestic
courts. Moreover the Italian state had not signed
or ratified the Trafficking Convention at the time
of the events of the case and therefore it was not
applicable to them.

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122668

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



134. Nevertheless, criminal investigations for the
alleged kidnapping of the first applicant had been
initiated immediately following the third applic-
ant’s oral complaints to the police of Turin on 24
May 2003. They noted that a law in relation to
human trafficking was only introduced in August
2003 (see Relevant domestic law). They further
reiterated their submissions under Article 3,
contending that an effective investigation into the
circumstances of the case had taken place.
135. Lastly, they submitted that in so far as the
Court wanted to examine the State’s conduct vis-
á-vis marriage agreements in the Rom com-
munity, the Italian Government noted that the
first applicant had in fact been freed and returned
to Bulgaria. However, it was not for the state to
judge the traditions of the Rom minority, their
identity or way of life, particularly since the Court
itself highlighted the importance of the Rom cul-
ture in Munoz Diaz.

3. The Bulgarian Government
136. The Government reiterated that the present
case did not concern trafficking in human beings,
as the facts did not fall under the definition of
trafficking according to Article 4 of the Traffick-
ing Convention. As confirmed by the excerpt of
the border police (submitted to the Court) the
applicants freely and voluntarily established
themselves in Italy according to their right of
freedom of movement. The first applicant, al-
though a minor, left the borders of Bulgaria and
arrived and resided in Italy with her parents, vol-
untarily and with their consent. The departure
from Bulgarian territory was lawful and the au-
thorities had no reason to prohibit it, allowing
such a move according to Article 2 of Protocol
No. 4 to the Convention and European Union le-
gislation. Moreover, there had been no evidence
of trafficking in human beings on Bulgarian ter-
ritory, an issue not alleged by the applicants. In-
deed, the applicants, alone or through their rep-
resentative, had not notified any of the Bulgarian
institutions in charge of trafficking. Any allega-
tions in this respect could be communicated to
the State Agency for Child Protection, the Nation-
al Committee to Combat Human Trafficking and
the Council of Ministers, the Prosecution of the
Republic of Bulgaria and the Ministry of Interior
which had specific powers under the Criminal
Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure to deal
with such allegations.

137. They submitted that the present case re-
garded a personal relationship of a private legal
nature in terms of the voluntary involvement in
marriage and the related rituals in accordance
with the particular ethnicity of the applicants.
According to the investigation, the first applicant
freely married Y. in accordance with their tradi-
tions. The accepted and practiced model of Roma
marriages provided for early and ubiquitous
marriages. Marriage age was governed by custom
according to the group to which the persons be-
longed, and in practice was generally a young age.
Roma marriages were considered concluded with
a wedding in the presence of the community and
it did not require a civil or religious procedure to
be considered sacred and indissoluble. The tradi-
tional Roma marriage consisted of two phases.
The first, the engagement, regulated the pre-re-
quisites of marriage such as the fixing of the
bride’s “price”/”ransom”/”dowry”, which is a
bargaining made by the fathers in view of the fact
that the bride will then be part of the family of the
groom. The second is the wedding, which includes
a set of rituals, the most important of which was
the consummation of the marriage, bearing in
mind that virginity was a pre-requisite to the
marriage. The Bulgarian Government submitted
that from the testimony of X. Y. and Z., as drawn
up by the Italian Urgent Action Squad, the wed-
ding ritual of the applicant to Y. conformed to
this traditional practice.
138. Moreover, it had not been established that
there had been any debasing or degrading atti-
tudes or instances of forced labour. The Govern-
ment submitted that in her testimony of 11 June
2003, the first applicant declared to have married
Y. and did not claim that she was dissatisfied with
her marriage or that herself or her parents had
been ill-treated or forced to work. Thus, according
to the Government, the facts of the case regarded
a regular consummation of a marriage and the
undertaking of usual household chores, which
could not amount to treatment prohibited under
Article 4, particularly since the first applicant ad-
mitted to having freely moved to Italy, travelled
by car and attended discotheques.
139. The Government considered that when the
Bulgarian Consular Section signalled a coercive
holding of a minor-aged female, the Italian author-
ities gave full assistance and carried out an effect-
ive investigation, but after having established the
above-mentioned facts, could not conclude that

2669European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



the case concerned trafficking in human beings.
They noted that the Italian authorities “freed” the
first applicant who was found to be in a good
health and mental condition. She was questioned
by staff specialised in interaction with minors and
had access to an interpreter. Moreover, the author-
ities provided support to her and her relatives,
including accommodation and payment of costs.
The Italian authorities took all the relevant witness
testimony and other measures to establish the
facts and the applicants had ample opportunity
to participate as witnesses in the investigation,
throughout which they were provided with an
interpreter. Thus, the relatives had also been dir-
ectly involved in the investigation. Therefore, the
criteria for an effective investigation according to
the Court’s case-law (Rantsev v. Cyprus and Rus-
sia, no. 25965/04, § 233, 7 January 2010) had been
fulfilled.
140. As to the steps taken by the Bulgarian author-
ities, the Bulgarian Government reiterated their
submissions under Article 3 (see paragraphs 121-
123 above). Indeed both the Bulgarian and Italian
authorities had reacted promptly. It followed that
the actions of both States had been in accordance
with Convention obligations (Rantsev, cited
above, § 289).
141. They further submitted that in so far as the
case could be considered under Article 4 the Bul-
garian authorities had fulfilled their positive ob-
ligations in an adequate and timely manner. The
Bulgarian Government noted that the Trafficking
Convention entered into force in respect of Bul-
garia in 2007 and therefore was not applicable at
the time of the events in the present case. How-
ever, the Government submitted that Bulgaria
had fulfilled its positive obligation and taken the
necessary measures to establish a workable and
effective legislation on the criminalisation of hu-
man trafficking.
142. They had further put in place an appropriate
legislative and administrative framework. They
noted that by 2003 the following legislation was
applicable, in connection with the prevention,
combating and criminalisation of trafficking:
– The United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organised Crime, adopted on 15
November 2000, ratified by Bulgaria in 2001
– The Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish
Trafficking in persons, Especially Women and
Children of 15 November 2000

– Recommendation No. R (85) 11 to the Member
States on the position of the victim in the frame-
work of criminal law and procedure, adopted by
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe on 28 June 1985
– Recommendation 1545 (2002) on the campaign
against trafficking in women of January 21, 2002
– Council Directive 2004/81/EC of 29 April 2004
on the residence permit issued to third country
nationals who are victims of trafficking in human
beings or who have been the subject of an action
to facilitate illegal immigration and who cooperate
with the competent authorities.
– European Parliament resolutions related to ex-
ploitation of prostitution and trafficking in people.
Moreover, by means of amendments to the
Criminal Code in 2002, human trafficking had
been criminalised (see Relevant domestic law)
and in 2003 a specific law on combating human
trafficking establishing effective counter-action
leverage was passed by parliament. Public inform-
ation was also provided by the national media on
the risks of trafficking in persons. Thus, the Bul-
garian Government took all feasible positive
measures on the creation of an effective domestic
system for the prevention, investigation and pro-
secution of such offences. Moreover, the applic-
ants had made no complaint in respect of this
framework.
143. The Bulgarian Government also submitted
that they had fulfilled their positive obligation to
take protective measures. They submitted that
there was no evidence that they had been particu-
larly notified about any particular circumstances
which could give rise to a justified and reasonable
suspicion of a real and immediate risk to the first
applicant before she left to Italy and later during
her stay there. In consequence there had not been
a positive obligation to take preliminary steps to
protect her.
144. As to a procedural obligation to investigate
potential trafficking, the Government reiterated
that the applicants actions were voluntary, this
notwithstanding that the Bulgarian and Italian
joint efforts led to the desired result of the first
applicant being released and returned to Bulgaria.
145. As to the forensic expertise presented, the
Government noted that this could not be con-
sidered as valid evidence as it had not been pro-
duced according to the law, it having been com-

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122670

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



piled one month after the first applicant’s return
to Bulgaria and not immediately at the time of the
alleged events.

B. The Court’s assessment

1. Application of Article 4 of the Convention
146. The Court has never considered the provi-
sions of the Convention as the sole framework of
reference for the interpretation of the rights and
freedoms enshrined therein (see Demir and
Baykara v. Turkey [GC], no. 34503/97, § 67, 12
November 2008). It has long stated that one of
the main principles of the application of the
Convention provisions is that it does not apply
them in a vacuum (see Loizidou v. Turkey, 18
December 1996, Reports 1996-VI; and Öcalan v.
Turkey [GC], no. 46221/99, § 163, ECHR 2005-
IV). As an international treaty, the Convention
must be interpreted in the light of the rules of in-
terpretation set out in the Vienna Convention of
23 May 1969 on the Law of Treaties (see Rantsev,
cited above, § 273).
147. Under that Convention, the Court is required
to ascertain the ordinary meaning to be given to
the words in their context and in the light of the
object and purpose of the provision from which
they are drawn (see Golder v. the United Kingdom,
21 February 1975, § 29, Series A no. 18; Loizidou,
cited above, § 43). The Court must have regard
to the fact that the context of the provision is a
treaty for the effective protection of individual
human rights and that the Convention must be
read as a whole, and interpreted in such a way as
to promote internal consistency and harmony
between its various provisions (see Stec and Others
v. the United Kingdom (dec.) [GC], nos. 65731/01
and 65900/01, § 48, ECHR 2005-X). Account must
also be taken of any relevant rules and principles
of international law applicable in relations
between the Contracting Parties and the Conven-
tion should so far as possible be interpreted in
harmony with other rules of international law of
which it forms part (see Al-Adsani, cited above,
§ 55; Demir and Baykara, cited above, § 67; Saadi
v. the United Kingdom [GC], no. 13229/03, § 62,
ECHR 2008-...; and Ranstev, cited above, §§ 273-
275).
148. The object and purpose of the Convention,
as an instrument for the protection of individual
human beings, requires that its provisions be in-
terpreted and applied so as to make its safeguards

practical and effective (see, inter alia, Soering,
cited above, § 87; and Artico v. Italy, 13 May 1980,
§ 33, Series A no. 37).
149. In Siliadin, considering the scope of “slavery”
under Article 4, the Court referred to the classic
definition of slavery contained in the 1926 Slavery
Convention, which required the exercise of a
genuine right of ownership and reduction of the
status of the individual concerned to an “object”
(see Siliadin v. France, no. 73316/01, § 122, ECHR
2005 VII). With regard to the concept of “ser-
vitude”, the Court has held that what is prohibited
is a “particularly serious form of denial of free-
dom” (see Van Droogenbroeck v. Belgium, Com-
mission’s report of 9 July 1980, §§ 78-80, Series
B no. 44). The concept of “servitude” entails an
obligation, under coercion, to provide one’s ser-
vices, and is linked with the concept of “slavery”
(see Seguin v. France (dec.), no. 42400/98, 7 March
2000; and Siliadin, cited above, § 124). For “forced
or compulsory labour” to arise, the Court has held
that there must be some physical or mental con-
straint, as well as some overriding of the person’s
will (see Van der Mussele v. Belgium, 23 November
1983, § 34, Series A no. 70; Siliadin, cited above,
§ 117).
150. The Court is not regularly called upon to
consider the application of Article 4 and, in par-
ticular, has had only two occasions to date to
consider the extent to which treatment associated
with trafficking fell within the scope of that Article
(Siliadin and Rantsev, both cited above). In the
latter case, the Court concluded that the treatment
suffered by the applicant amounted to servitude
and forced and compulsory labour, although it
fell short of slavery. In the former, trafficking itself
was considered to run counter to the spirit and
purpose of Article 4 of the Convention such as to
fall within the scope of the guarantees offered by
that Article without the need to assess which of
the three types of proscribed conduct was engaged
by the particular treatment in the case in question.
151. In Rantsev, the Court considered that traffick-
ing in human beings, by its very nature and aim
of exploitation, is based on the exercise of powers
attaching to the right of ownership. It treats hu-
man beings as commodities to be bought and sold
and put to forced labour, often for little or no
payment, usually in the sex industry but also
elsewhere. It implies close surveillance of the
activities of victims, whose movements are often
circumscribed. It involves the use of violence and

2671European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



threats against victims, who live and work under
poor conditions. It is described in the explanatory
report accompanying the Anti-Trafficking Con-
vention as the modern form of the old worldwide
slave trade. In those circumstances, the Court
concluded that trafficking itself, within the
meaning of Article 3(a) of the Palermo Protocol
and Article 4(a) of the Anti-Trafficking Conven-
tion, fell within the scope of Article 4 of the Con-
vention (see Rantsev, cited above, §§ 281-282).

2. Application to the present case
152. The Court once again highlights that it is
confronted with a dispute over the exact nature
of the alleged events. The parties to the case have
presented diverging factual circumstances and
regrettably the lack of investigation by the Italian
authorities has led to little evidence being available
to determine the case. Having said that, the Court
cannot but take its decisions on the basis of the
evidence submitted by the parties.
153. In this light, in so far as an objection ratione
materiae can be inferred from the Governments’
submissions the Court considers that it is not ne-
cessary to deal with this objection since it con-
siders that the complaint, in its various branches,
is in any event inadmissible for the following
reasons.

(a) The complaint against Italy

1. The circumstances as alleged by the applicants
154. The Court has already held above that the
circumstances as alleged by the applicants could
have amounted to human trafficking. However,
it considers that from the evidence submitted
there is not sufficient ground to establish the
veracity of the applicants’ version of events,
namely that the first applicant was transferred to
Italy in order to serve as a pawn in some kind of
racket devoted to illegal activities. In consequence,
the Court does not recognise the existence of cir-
cumstances capable of amounting to the recruit-
ment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or re-
ceipt of persons for the purpose of exploitation,
forced labour or services, slavery or practices
similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of or-
gans. It follows that the applicants’ allegation that
there had been an instance of actual human traf-
ficking has not been proved and therefore cannot
be accepted by the Court.

155. Since it has not been established that the first
applicant was a victim of trafficking, the Court
considers that the obligations under Article 4 to
penalise and prosecute trafficking in the ambit of
a proper legal or regulatory framework cannot
come into play in the instant case.
156. As to the Article 4 obligation on the author-
ities to take appropriate measures within the scope
of their powers to remove the individual from
that situation or risk, the Court notes that irre-
spective of whether or not there existed a credible
suspicion that there was a real or immediate risk
that the first applicant was being trafficked or ex-
ploited, the Court has already found under Article
3 of the Convention that the Italian authorities
had taken all the required steps to free the applic-
ant from the situation she was in (see paragraph
103 above).
157. In so far as Article 4 also provides for a pro-
cedural obligation to investigate situations of po-
tential trafficking, the Court has already found in
its assessment under the procedural aspect of
Article 3 above (see paragraphs 107-108 above)
that the Italian authorities failed to undertake an
effective investigation into the circumstances of
the present case.
158. In consequence the Court does not find it
necessary to examine this limb of the complaint.
159. Given the above, the Court considers that
the overall complaint under Article 4 against Italy
based on the applicant’s version of events is inad-
missible, as manifestly ill-founded pursuant to
Article 35 §§ 3 and 4 of the Convention.

ii. The circumstances as established by the author-
ities
160. The Court notes that the authorities con-
cluded that the facts of the case amounted to a
typical marriage according to the Roma tradition.
The first applicant, who was aged seventeen years
and nine months at the time of the alleged mar-
riage, never denied that she willingly married Y.
She did, however, deny that any payment had
been made to her father for the marriage. Never-
theless, the photos collected by the police appear
to suggest that an exchange of money in fact took
place. Little has been established in respect of any
ensuing treatment within the household.
161. The Court therefore considers that in relation
to the events as established by the authorities,
again, there is not sufficient evidence indicating
that the first applicant was held in slavery. Even

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122672

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



assuming that the applicant’s father received a
sum of money in respect of the alleged marriage,
the Court is of the view that, in the circumstances
of the present case, such a monetary contribution
cannot be considered to amount to a price at-
tached to the transfer of ownership, which would
bring into play the concept of slavery. The Court
reiterates that marriage has deep-rooted social
and cultural connotations which may differ largely
from one society to another (see Schalk and Kopf
v. Austria, no. 30141/04, § 62, ECHR 2010). Ac-
cording to the Court, this payment can reasonably
be accepted as representing a gift from one family
to another, a tradition common to many different
cultures in today’s society.
162. Neither is there any evidence indicating that
the first applicant was subjected to “servitude” or
“forced or compulsory” labour, the former entail-
ing coercion to provide one’s services (see Siliadin,
cited above § 124) and the latter bringing to mind
the idea of physical or mental constraint. What
there has to be is work “exacted ... under the
menace of any penalty” and also performed
against the will of the person concerned, that is
work for which he or she “has not offered himself
or herself voluntarily” (see Van der Mussele, cited
above, § 34, and Siliadin, cited above § 117). The
court observes that despite the first applicant’s
testimony claiming that she was forced to work,
the third applicant explained in her complaint of
24 May 2003 that her family had been employed
to do housework.
163. Furthermore, according to the Court the post
facto medical records submitted are not sufficient
to determine beyond reasonable doubt that the
first applicant actually suffered some form of ill-
treatment or exploitation as understood in the
definition of trafficking. Neither can the Court
consider that the sole payment of a sum of money
suffices to consider that there had been trafficking
in human beings. Nor is there evidence suggesting
that such a union was contracted for the purposes
of exploitation, be it sexual or other. Thus, there
is no reason to believe that the union was under-
taken for purposes other than those generally as-
sociated with a traditional marriage.
164. The Court notes with interest the Parliament-
ary Assembly of the Council of Europe’s resolu-
tions (see Relevant international texts above)
showing concern in respect of Roma women in
the context of forced and child marriages (the
latter defined as the union of two persons at least

one of whom is under 18 years of age) and it
shares these apprehensions. The Court, however,
notes that the resolutions airing such concerns
and encouraging action in this respect are dated
2005 and 2010 and therefore at the time of the
alleged events not only was there not any binding
instrument, as remains the case to date, but in
actual fact there was not enough awareness and
consensus among the international community
to condemn such actions. The prevailing docu-
ment at the time (which was not ratified by Italy
or Bulgaria) was the Convention on Consent to
Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Regis-
tration of Marriages (1962) which determined
that it was for the States to decide on an age limit
for contracting marriage and allowed a dispensa-
tion as to age to be given by a competent authority
in exceptional circumstances. This trend is reflec-
ted in the legislation of many of the member States
of the Council of Europe which consider eighteen
years to be the age of consent for the purposes of
marriage, and provide for exceptional circum-
stances whereby a court or other authority (often
on consulting the guardians) may allow a marriage
to be contracted by a person who is younger (for
example, Azerbaijan, Bulgaria, Croatia, Italy,
Hungary, Malta, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sweden), the most common being at least
sixteen years of age.
165. The Court notes that in 2003, when the first
applicant appears to have undertaken this union,
she was a few months away from adulthood. In-
deed under Italian legislation, it is perfectly legal
for a person aged sixteen or more to have consen-
sual sexual intercourse (see by implication article
609 quarter in paragraph 40 above), even without
the consent of the parent, and he or she may also
leave the family home with the consent of the
parents. Moreover, in the instant case there is not
sufficient evidence indicating that the union was
forced on the first applicant who had not testified
that she had not consented to it and who emphas-
ized that Y. had not forced her to have sexual in-
tercourse with him. In this light it cannot be said
that the circumstances as established by the au-
thorities raise any issue under Article 4 of the
Convention.
166. Accordingly, this part of the complaint under
this provision, against Italy, is inadmissible as
being manifestly ill-founded and must be rejected
under Article 35 §§ 3 and 4 of the Convention.

2673European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



(b) The complaint against Bulgaria
167. The Court notes that had any alleged traffick-
ing commenced in Bulgaria it would not be out-
side the Court’s competence to examine whether
Bulgaria complied with any obligation it may have
had to take measures within the limits of its own
jurisdiction and powers to protect the first applic-
ant from trafficking and to investigate the possib-
ility that she had been trafficked (see Rantsev,
cited above § 207). In addition, member States
are also subject to a duty in cross-border traffick-
ing cases to cooperate effectively with the relevant
authorities of other States concerned in the invest-
igation of events which occurred outside their
territories (see Rantsev, cited above, § 289).
168. However, whether the matters complained
of give rise to the Bulgarian’s State responsibility
in the circumstances of the present case is a
question which falls to be determined by the
Court according to its examination of the merits
of the complaint.
169. The Court has already established, above,
that in respect of both the version of the events,
the circumstances of the case did not give rise to
human trafficking, a situation which would have
engaged the responsibility of the Bulgarian State,
had any trafficking commenced there. Moreover,
the applicants did not complain that the Bulgarian
authorities did not investigate any potential traf-
ficking, but solely that the Bulgarian authorities
did not provide them with the required assistance
in their dealings with the Italian authorities. As
suggested above in paragraph 119 in fine, the
Court considers that the Bulgarian authorities
assisted the applicants and maintained constant
contact and co-operation with the Italian author-
ities.
170. It follows that the complaint under Article 4
against Bulgaria is also manifestly ill-founded and
must be rejected under Article 35 §§ 3 and 4 of
the Convention.

III. Alleged violation of Article 14 of the Con-
vention
171. The applicants further complained that the
treatment they suffered was due to their Roma
origin. They relied on Article 14 of the Conven-
tion, which reads as follows:
“The enjoyment of the rights and freedoms set
forth in [the] Convention shall be secured without
discrimination on any ground such as sex, race,
colour, language, religion, political or other

opinion, national or social origin, association with
a national minority, property, birth or other
status.”
172. The applicants submitted that they had been
discriminated against by the authorities in the
handling of their case. They noted that the fact
that the offenders they accused had also been
Roma had no relevance, since Roma of Serbian
origin were wealthy enough to get away scot free
after having made arrangements with corrupt
police agents.
173. The Italian Government considered that had
the applicants been discriminated against, no in-
vestigation would have ensued. However, as ex-
plained above, a full investigation had been under-
taken and the conclusions of the authorities had
been justified on the basis of an objective and
reasonable approach.
174. The Bulgarian Government submitted that
their authorities had taken prompt, adequate and
comprehensive measures to protect the interests
of the applicants, as confirmed by the evidence
provided by the CRD. They noted that the data-
base of the Ministry of Foreign affairs did not
store data in relation to ethnicity. Thus, there
could be no allegation that the applicants had been
subjected to discriminatory attitudes due to their
ethnic origin. Moreover, they noted that the
family accused by the applicants of such treatment
was of the same ethnicity, which in itself dispelled
any ideas of a difference in treatment.
175. The Court’s case-law on Article 14 establishes
that discrimination means treating differently,
without an objective and reasonable justification,
persons in relevantly similar situations (see Willis
v. the United Kingdom, no. 36042/97, § 48, ECHR
2002-IV). Racial violence is a particular affront
to human dignity and, in view of its perilous
consequences, requires from the authorities spe-
cial vigilance and a vigorous reaction. It is for this
reason that the authorities must use all available
means to combat racism and racist violence,
thereby reinforcing democracy’s vision of a society
in which diversity is not perceived as a threat but
as a source of its enrichment. (see Nachova and
Others v. Bulgaria [GC], nos. 43577/98 and
43579/98, § 145, ECHR 2005-VII).
176. The Court further recalls that when investig-
ating violent incidents, State authorities have the
additional duty to take all reasonable steps to un-
mask any racist motive and to establish whether
or not ethnic hatred or prejudice may have played

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122674

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



a role in the events. Treating racially induced viol-
ence and brutality on an equal footing with cases
that have no racist overtones would be turning a
blind eye to the specific nature of acts that are
particularly destructive of fundamental rights. A
failure to make a distinction in the way in which
situations that are essentially different are handled
may constitute unjustified treatment irreconcil-
able with Article 14 of the Convention. Admit-
tedly, proving racial motivation will often be ex-
tremely difficult in practice. The respondent
State’s obligation to investigate possible racist
overtones to a violent act is an obligation to use
its best endeavours and is not absolute; the author-
ities must do what is reasonable in the circum-
stances of the case (see Nachova and others, cited
above, § 160).
177. Faced with the applicants’ complaint under
Article 14, the Court’s task is to establish first of
all whether or not racism was a causal factor in
the circumstances leading to their complaint to
the authorities and in relation to this, whether or
not the respondent State complied with its oblig-
ation to investigate possible racist motives.
Moreover, the Court should also examine
whether in carrying out the investigation into the
applicants’ allegation of ill-treatment by the police,
the domestic authorities discriminated against
the applicants and, if so, whether the discrimina-
tion was based on their ethnic origin.
178. As to the first limb of the complaint, the
Court notes that even assuming the applicants’
version of events was truthful, the treatment they
claim to have suffered at the hands of third parties
cannot be said in any way to have racist overtones
or that it was instigated by ethnic hatred or preju-
dice because the alleged perpetrators belonged to
the same ethnic group as the applicants. Indeed,
the applicants did not make this allegation to the
police when they complained about the events
related to the Serbian family. It follows that there
was no positive obligation on the State to invest-
igate such motives.
179. As to the second limb, namely whether the
domestic authorities discriminated against the
applicants on the basis of their ethnic origin, the
Court notes that while it has already held above
that the Italian authorities failed to adequately
investigate the applicants’ allegations, from the
documents submitted, it does not transpire that
such failure to act was a consequence of discrim-
inatory attitudes. Indeed, there appears to be no

racist verbal abuse by the police during the invest-
igation, nor were any tendentious remarks made
by the prosecutor in relation to the applicants’
Roma origin throughout the investigation or by
the courts in the subsequent trials. Moreover, the
applicants did not accuse the authorities of dis-
playing anti-Roma sentiment at the relevant time.
180. Accordingly, in so far as the complaint is
directed against Italy, it is manifestly ill-founded,
and is to be rejected according to Article 35 §§ 3
and 4 of the Convention.
181. The Court considers that no such complaint
has been directed against Bulgaria, and even if it
were, the complaint is manifestly ill-founded and
is to be rejected according to Article 35 §§ 3 and
4 of the Convention.

IV. Other alleged violations of the Convention
182. Lastly, the applicants complained that the
first and third applicants were not provided with
lawyers and interpreters during their questioning,
were not informed in what capacity they were
being questioned, and were forced to sign docu-
ments the content of which they were unaware.
They invoked Article 13 of the Convention.
183. The Court considers that the complaint in
so far as Article 13 is invoked is misconceived and
would more appropriately be analysed under
Article 6.
184. However, the Court reiterates that a person
may not claim to be a victim of a violation of his
right to a fair trial under Article 6 of the Conven-
tion which, according to him or her, took place
in the course of proceedings in which he or she
was acquitted or which were discontinued (see
Osmanov and Husseinov v. Bulgaria (dec.), nos.
54178/00 and 59901/00, 4 September 2003, and
the case-law cited therein).
185. The Court notes that the proceedings against
the first applicant were discontinued (see para-
graph 29 above) and that the third applicant was
acquitted by a judgment of 8 February 2006 (see
paragraph 32 above). The Court therefore con-
siders that in these circumstances the two applic-
ants cannot claim to be victims of a violation of
their right to a fair trial under Article 6.
186. It follows that this complaint must be rejected
pursuant to Article 35 §§ 3 and 4 of the Conven-
tion.

V. Application of Article 41 of the Convention
187. Article 41 of the Convention provides:

2675European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



“If the Court finds that there has been a violation
of the Convention or the Protocols thereto, and
if the internal law of the High Contracting Party
concerned allows only partial reparation to be
made, the Court shall, if necessary, afford just
satisfaction to the injured party.”
188. Although a request for just satisfaction (EUR
200,000) was made when the applicants lodged
their application, they did not submit a claim for
just satisfaction when requested by the Court.
Accordingly, the Court considers that there is no
call to award them any sum on that account.

For these reasons, the Court
1. Declares unanimously the complaints concern-
ing the lack of adequate steps to prevent the first
applicant’s ill-treatment by the Serbian family by
securing her swift release and the lack of an effect-
ive investigation into that alleged ill-treatment,
by the Italian authorities, admissible and the re-
mainder of the application inadmissible;
2. Holds by 6 votes to 1 that there has not been a
violation of Article 3 of the Convention in respect
of the steps taken by the authorities to release the
first applicant;
3. Holds unanimously that there has been a viola-
tion of Article 3 of the Convention in so far as the
investigation into the first applicant’s alleged ill-
treatment by private individuals was not effective;

Dissenting opinion of Judge Kalaydjieva
Together with my esteemed colleagues, I am
“struck by the fact that following the first applic-
ant’s release, it took the authorities less than a full
day to reach their conclusions” (paragraph 104)
and discontinue any further investigation into the
applicants’ complaints. These complaints involved
ill-treatment and non-consensual sexual acts with
a minor, which allegedly lasted one month and
took place in a villa owned by a person with a
criminal record. The Court was unanimous in
finding that “had they been proved, [some of the
acts complained of] could have amounted to hu-
man trafficking” and -further on - that no invest-
igation had taken place.
What I find even more striking in the present case
is the fact that having raided the villa, where the
first applicant was allegedly held against her will,
and released her seventeen days after obtaining
information that the mother feared that her
daughter might be subjected to forced prostitu-
tion, the authorities decided not only to dismiss

these complaints without any further enquiries,
but also to immediately institute criminal proceed-
ings against the seventeen-year-old girl and her
mother for perjury and false accusations to the
effect “that X., Y. and Z. [had] deprived [the
minor] of her liberty by keeping her in the villa,
thus accusing them of kidnapping while knowing
they were innocent” (paragraph 30).
It appears somewhat illogical that having “opined
that the circumstances of the present case con-
cerned a Roma marriage”, the authorities nonethe-
less undertook protective measures by placing the
girl in a Caritas shelter and then handing her into
her mother’s care, instead of leaving her free to
happily rejoin her “husband” after an action ap-
parently regarded as an unnecessary interference
in their peaceful family affairs.
I find it alarming that, after receiving further de-
tailed and insistent complaints from the applicants
(paragraphs 16 and 25) through the Bulgarian
embassy in Rome, the Italian authorities insisted
on proceeding with the accusations against the
applicants rather than investigating the circum-
stances complained of. It is difficult to avoid the
impression that this was done in an attempt to
actively disprove not only the purposes for which
the minor had allegedly been forcefully held in
the villa, but also the very fact of the unlawful
deprivation of liberty, from which they released
her. Indeed, the respondent Italian Government
relied on the proceedings instituted for perjury
to convince the Court that “the facts as alleged by
the applicants had been entirely disproved during
domestic proceedings” (paragraph 90) and that
the “traditional marriage” understanding of the
events had been considered “truthful by the
judgment of the Turin Investigating Magistrate”
in discontinuing the proceedings against the first
applicant as well as found “probable by the Turin
Tribunal in its judgment of 2006” acquitting the
third applicant (paragraphs 92 and 93). In fact,
the judge of the Turin Tribunal found the photo-
graphs of the “marriage” to depict a scene that
was rather grim for Roma traditions. Acting in
proceedings in absentia, where the third applicant
was neither summoned to appear, nor able to de-
fend herself, or explain the circumstances, he
dismissed the accusations of perjury and false ac-
cusations against her, noting also that X., Y. and
Z. had availed themselves of their right to remain
silent in the “false accusations of kidnapping”, al-
legedly raised by the mother.

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122676

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



The applicants’ allegations of ill-treatment by the
Italian authorities were not limited to the failure
to undertake timely action for the release and
protection of a minor, as suggested by paragraphs
102-108 of the judgment. In this regard I see no
reason to join the majority in their approval of
the “promptness and diligence” (paragraph 102)
displayed in an action which the national author-
ities themselves deemed unnecessary and caused
by false assertions.
Nor were the applicants’ complaints about the
manner in which they were allegedly questioned
separated from those concerning the attitude of
the Italian authorities – as examined in paragraphs
115-118. In this regard, the very fact that the
criminal proceedings for perjury and false accus-
ations were instituted a few hours after the al-
legedly threatening interrogations suffices to
support a conclusion that the threats were quite
realistic.
The applicants’ submissions about ill-treatment
by the authorities concerned the overall approach
of the Italian investigation authorities to their
complaints. Seeing that they were not only dis-
missed without any enquiries, but were also fol-
lowed by an attempt to actively disprove them, I
cannot come to any explanation for this treatment
other than an assumption on the part of the au-
thorities that the applicants had been telling lies
from the outset. This assumption transpires from
the reluctance to organise the timely release of
the minor, the manner in which she and her
mother were hastily questioned under threat and
the immediate (but unsuccessful) institution of
proceedings for perjury in an attempt to establish
that their complaints were nothing but false accus-
ations, made while knowing that X., Y. and Z.
were innocent.
This explanation appears to be more reasonable
than that offered to the Court, namely, that the
“Italian authorities opined that the circumstances
of the present case fell within the context of a
Roma marriage”. Even if correct (and I would
venture to doubt it), such an “opinion” could not
reasonably explain the manner in which the au-
thorities dealt with the applicants’ complaints of
ill-treatment, non-consensual sex, forced particip-
ation in criminal activities, etc., unless it is seen
as an understanding that a Roma marriage consti-
tuted an agreement of the parents to sell a bride
“for all purposes”.

I find myself unable to accept either of these two
explanations for the manner in which the author-
ities dealt with the applicants’ complaints and find
each of them to be based on equally inappropriate
assumptions.

NOOT

1. Dit arrest betreft een klacht op grond van art.
4 EVRM en raakt in belangrijke mate aan het fe-
nomeen mensenhandel. Alleen al het tot nu toe
beperkte aantal uitspraken van het Hof over art.
4 EVRM in dit verband noopt tot bespreking van
dit – nog niet definitieve – arrest. Uit de eerste
zaak voor het Europees Hof met betrekking tot
art. 4 EVRM, Siliadin t. Frankrijk (EHRM 26 juli
2005, nr. 73316/01, «EHRC» 2005/103 m.nt. Van
der Velde, «JV» 2005/425 m.nt. Lawson), volgde
onder meer dat een verdragsstaat bij het EVRM
aansprakelijk gehouden kan worden voor een
schending van art. 4 EVRM door een particulier.
In die zaak oordeelde het Hof dat het Franse
strafrecht een minderjarig en illegaal verblijvend
meisje uit Togo, dat onder zeer slechte omstan-
digheden in een huishouden in Frankrijk werkte,
niet voldoende en effectief beschermde tegen
de dienstbaarheid waaraan zij was onderworpen
door de familie waar ze bij inwoonde en moest
werken. Over deze materie gaat ook C.N. en V.
t. Frankrijk, EHRM 11 oktober 2012, nr. 67724/09.
In deze zaak was zelfs sprake van een familiere-
latie tussen slachtoffer en uitbuiters. In C.N. t.
Verenigd Koninkrijk betrof het, net als in de
hierboven afgedrukte zaak M., huishoudelijk
werk; ook in deze zaak constateerde het Hof een
schending van art. 4 EVRM. In het arrest Rantsev
t. Cyprus en Rusland (EHRM 7 januari 2010, nr.
25965/04, «EHRC» 2010/29 m.nt. Timmer), bracht
het EHRM mensenhandel binnen het bereik van
art. 4 EVRM en formuleerde het bovendien een
aantal verplichtingen van lidstaten van de Raad
van Europa met betrekking tot de aanpak van
mensenhandel. Die positieve verplichtingen, die
niet alleen bestaan uit opsporing en vervolging,
maar ook uit preventie, bescherming van
slachtoffers en internationale samenwerking,
gelden zowel ten aanzien van bronlanden en
transitlanden als voor bestemmingslanden (zie
hierover A. Beijer, ‘Rantsev v. Cyprus en Rus-
land, Een korte schets van de situatie in Neder-
land wat betreft mensenhandel’, Ars Aequi 2010,

2677European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



p. 684-691; M. Boot-Matthijssen, ‘Artikel 4 en de
aanpak van mensenhandel’, Nederlands Tijd-
schrift voor de Mensenrechten/NJCM-Bulletin
2010, p. 501-519). Mensenhandel speelt zich
echter niet alleen af in de seksindustrie en het
huishoudelijk werk; ook in andere economische
sectoren zoals horeca en land- en tuinbouw
worden mensen uitgebuit (zie hierover Nationaal
Rapporteur Mensenhandel, Achtste rapportage
mensenhandel, Den Haag 2010).
2. In de onderhavige zaak veroordeelt het Hof
Italië voor een schending van art. 3 EVRM van-
wege de gebrekkige effectiviteit van het onder-
zoek door de Italiaanse autoriteiten naar de
klacht dat M, minderjarig op het moment waarop
de relevante feiten speelden, herhaaldelijk was
geslagen en verkracht in de villa. De klagers
stellen dat zij naar Italië zijn gegaan na een be-
lofte van werk maar dat daar niets van terecht-
kwam, en dat M bedreigd werd en gedwongen
om mee te doen aan berovingen en seksuele
activiteiten toen ze in Italië verbleef. Hoewel
deze feiten niet vast zijn komen te staan, kan het
Hof niet uitsluiten dat de feiten zoals klagers die
naar voren brengen indien bewezen, mensen-
handel hadden kunnen opleveren zoals in inter-
nationale verdragen gedefinieerd, “which un-
doubtedly also amounts to inhuman and degra-
ding treatment under art. 3 of the Convention”
(par. 106). Mensenhandel wordt hier dus be-
noemd als een onmenselijke en vernederende
behandeling in de zin van art. 3 EVRM.
3. Het Hof oordeelt – op grond van art. 3 EVRM
– dat de Italiaanse autoriteiten de plicht hadden
om zich in de zaak te verdiepen en alle relevante
feiten boven water te krijgen door gedegen on-
derzoek, waarbij ook dit aspect van de aangifte
had moeten worden onderzocht. Dat was niet
het geval, de Italiaanse autoriteiten waren im-
mers na het zien van de trouwfoto’s en een paar
verklaringen uitgegaan van een Roma-huwelijk.
Het Hof acht deze conclusie echter onvoldoende
reden om alle twijfel weg te nemen over de
vraag of deze omstandigheden op mensenhan-
del zouden duiden. Het wegnemen van die
twijfel zou een bijzonder grondig onderzoek
vereisen, en een mogelijk Roma-huwelijk kan
geen reden zijn om de omstandigheden van
deze zaak niet verder te bekijken (par. 106). De
Italiaanse autoriteiten hebben volgens het Hof
wel heel snel besloten om dit niet te doen. Dat
had onder meer tot gevolg dat geen medisch

bewijs is gezocht met betrekking tot de fysieke
conditie van M. Daarom oordeelt het Hof dat het
onderzoek naar de slechte behandeling – door
particuliere personen – niet effectief was zoals
art. 3 EVRM vereist.
4. Het Hof acht een onderzoeksplicht naar de
vermeende mensenhandel van belang op grond
van art. 3 EVRM. Het Hof komt vervolgens niet
toe aan de behandeling van de klachten op
grond van art. 4 EVRM. De klagers hadden ge-
steld dat de behandeling van M door de Servi-
sche familie en het feit dat M gedwongen was
deel te nemen aan roven en stelen, een schen-
ding van art. 4 EVRM oplevert. Het Hof verklaart
de klacht niet-ontvankelijk. Het vaststellen van
slachtofferschap van mensenhandel was niet
mogelijk aldus het Hof, nu de Italiaanse rechter
had geoordeeld dat het onmogelijk was om de
feiten duidelijk vast te stellen. Dat is naar het
oordeel van het Hof begrijpelijk omdat de Ita-
liaanse autoriteiten een beperkt aantal mensen
hadden ondervraagd. Op grond van de overge-
legde trouwfoto’s zijn de autoriteiten vervolgens
uitgegaan van een traditioneel Roma-huwelijk.
Het Hof benadrukt hier dat het zich geconfron-
teerd ziet met een discussie over de precieze
aard van de gebeurtenissen. Er is dan ook niet
genoeg bewijs voor mensenhandel en daarom
komen ook niet de (positieve) verplichtingen op
grond van art. 4 EVRM aan de orde (par. 155).
En of er nu wel of niet een reëel of onmiddellijk
risico was dat dochter M slachtoffer was van
mensenhandel: ze is bevrijd door de Italiaanse
politie, zoals het Hof al had vastgesteld. Nu het
Hof al een schending van art. 3 EVRM heeft
vastgesteld oordeelt het Hof dat het niet nodig
is dezelfde klacht op grond van art. 4 te onder-
zoeken (par. 156-158).
5. Op dezelfde dag dat dochter M werd bevrijd
en gehoord door de Italiaanse autoriteiten,
werden de strafrechtelijke procedures die tegen
de vermeende daders waren ingesteld, omgezet
in strafrechtelijke procedures tegen dochter M
zelf en haar moeder voor het doen van een valse
aangifte van onder meer ontvoering. Het ver-
baast het Hof dat het na de bevrijding van M de
Italiaanse autoriteiten minder dan een dag heeft
gekost om tot hun conclusies te komen. Niette-
min merkt het Hof op dat het feit dat de klagers
waren gewaarschuwd over de mogelijkheid dat
zij zouden worden vervolgd als ze de waarheid
niet zouden spreken “may be considered to be

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122678

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



part of the normal duties of the authorities when
questioning an individual, and not an unlawful
threat” (par. 117). Uit de dissenting opinion van
rechter Kalaydjieva blijkt haar twijfel over de
werkelijke gang van zaken en het vermoeden
van vooringenomenheid van de Italiaanse
autoriteiten. Omdat de klachten van de Bulgaar-
se Roma-familie zonder enige navraag niet al-
leen waren afgewezen, maar hierop ook een
poging volgde om de klachten actief te weerleg-
gen, kon zij tot geen andere verklaring voor deze
behandeling komen dan dat de Italiaanse auto-
riteiten ervan uit moeten zijn gegaan dat de
klagers vanaf het begin hadden gelogen. Nu
Italië echter geen nader onderzoek heeft gedaan
naar de feiten, inclusief de mogelijke mensen-
handel, kon de Italiaanse justitie binnen een dag
aan de slag met nader strafrechtelijk onderzoek
naar dochter M en haar moeder. Over de behan-
deling van de politie waren i.c. op nationaal ni-
veau ook geen klachten ingediend en dus waren
met betrekking tot deze klacht bij het Hof niet
alle nationale rechtsmiddelen uitgeput. Uiteinde-
lijk leidt het oordeel van het Hof op dit punt
echter tot een onbevredigende uitkomst. Als
Italië aan zijn onderzoeksplicht had voldaan, is
het twijfelachtig of een adequaat strafrechtelijk
onderzoek naar mogelijke mensenhandel, ook
als sprake zou zijn geweest van weinig opspo-
ringsindicaties, binnen een paar uur afgerond
had kunnen zijn met de conclusie dat sprake was
van een valse aangifte.
6. De uitspraak draait om het (vermeende) Ro-
ma-huwelijk. Ten aanzien van het betalen van
een bruidsschat overweegt het Hof dat, gezien
de omstandigheden van de zaak, zo’n geldelijke
bijdrage niet beschouwd kan worden als een
prijs met betrekking tot de overdracht van
eigendom, zoals bij slavernij. “The Court reitera-
tes that marriage has deep-rooted social and
cultural connotations which may differ largely
from one society to another […] this payment
can reasonably be accepted as representing a
gift from one family to another, a tradition
common to many different cultures in today’s
society” (par. 161). Louter het betalen van een
som geld is dan ook onvoldoende om ervan uit
te gaan dat sprake is van mensenhandel, “[n]or
is there evidence suggesting that such a union
was contracted for the purpose of exploitation,
be it sexual or other” (par. 163). Er is naar het

oordeel van het Hof geen reden om te veronder-
stellen dat het huwelijk i.c. voor een ander doel
was gesloten dan een traditioneel huwelijk.
7. Het is met name de vraag hoe cultuur en tra-
dities – zoals bij een Roma-huwelijk, als er al
sprake zou zijn van een eenvormige Roma-cul-
tuur en -traditie – zich verhouden met de kern-
waarden die in art. 4 (en art. 3) EVRM besloten
liggen. Het Hof noemt een aantal resoluties van
de Parlementaire Assemblee van de Raad van
Europa uit 2005 en 2010, waarin zorg wordt ge-
uit, ook specifiek ten aanzien van Roma-vrouwen
en -meisjes, over gedwongen huwelijken en
kindhuwelijken die hierin worden beschouwd
als schendingen van fundamentele mensenrech-
ten. Het Hof legt deze resoluties echter terzijde.
Volgens het Hof waren ten tijde van de vermeen-
de feiten hieromtrent geen juridisch bindende
instrumenten van kracht en ontbrak consensus
binnen de internationale gemeenschap om zulks
te veroordelen.
8. Een Roma-huwelijk kan onder omstandighe-
den een gedwongen huwelijk zijn. Daarbij moet
worden aangetekend dat de term ‘gedwongen
huwelijk’ niet eenduidig is. Zo worden in Neder-
land verschillende vormen van gedwongen hu-
welijken onderscheiden, variërend van gedwon-
gen gearrangeerde huwelijken tot kindhuwelij-
ken (A. Cornelissens, J. Kuppens en H. Ferwerda,
Huwelijksdwang. Een verbintenis voor het leven?
Een verkenning van de aard en aanpak van ge-
dwongen huwelijken in Nederland, Den Haag:
WODC 2009). Een daadwerkelijk gedwongen
huwelijk wordt internationaal gezien als een
vorm van geweld tegen vrouwen en meisjes. In
het in 2011 tot stand gekomen Verdrag van de
Raad van Europa ter bestrijding van geweld te-
gen vrouwen worden partijen verplicht het
dwingen van een vrouw of meisje tot een huwe-
lijk strafbaar te stellen (Raad van Europa, Ver-
drag ter preventie en bestrijding van geweld te-
gen vrouwen en huiselijk geweld, CM(2011)49
final, art. 37 (nog niet in werking getreden); zie
ook Kamerstukken I 2012/13, 32 840 A, Verrui-
ming strafrechtelijke aanpak huwelijksdwang,
polygamie en vrouwelijke genitale verminking;
dit wetsvoorstel is op 23 oktober 2012 met alge-
mene stemmen door de Tweede Kamer aange-
nomen).
9. Een gedwongen huwelijk kan onder omstan-
digheden zelfs een met slavernij vergelijkbare
praktijk in de zin van mensenhandel zijn. Het

2679European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

221«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM



VN-Palermo Protocol bevat een niet-limitatieve
opsomming van vormen van uitbuiting, waaron-
der met slavernij vergelijkbare praktijken (het
Protocol inzake de voorkoming, bestrijding en
bestraffing van mensenhandel, in het bijzonder
vrouwenhandel en kinderhandel tot aanvulling
van het Verdrag van de Verenigde Naties tegen
grensoverschrijdende georganiseerde misdaad,
New York, 15 november 2000, Trb. 2001, 69). In
deze context is ook de modelwetgeving van be-
lang die door het United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) in 2009 is ontwikkeld ter
implementatie van het VN-Palermo Protocol.
Deze modelwetgeving noemt een gedwongen
huwelijk expliciet als mogelijke vorm van men-
senhandel (UNODC Model Law Against Traffic-
king in Persons, 2009, p. 16). Het gaat hierbij om
een instituut of praktijk waarbij “(i) A woman
[person] or child without the right to refuse is
promised or given in marriage on payment of a
consideration in money or in kind to her [his]
parents, guardian, family or any other person
or group; or (ii) The husband of a woman, his
family or his clan has the right to transfer her to
another person for value received or otherwise;
or (iii) A woman on the death of her husband is
liable to be inherited by another person”. Bron
van deze formuleringen is oorspronkelijk art. 1
van het Aanvullende Verdrag inzake de afschaf-
fing van slavernij, de slavenhandel en met sla-
vernij gelijk te stellen instellingen en praktijken
(Genève, 7 september 1956, Trb. 1957, 118).
Hoewel een gedwongen huwelijk niet noodzake-
lijkerwijs wordt gesloten met het oogmerk van
uitbuiting, wordt het, als sprake is van een ma-
teriële wederprestatie, in voornoemd Aanvullend
Verdrag benoemd als een met slavernij verge-
lijkbare praktijk. Dit verdrag is door Italië op 12
februari 1958, en door Bulgarije op 21 augustus
1958 geratificeerd. Het is vreemd dat het Hof dit
verdrag niet noemt in het hoofdstuk met de voor
deze uitspraak relevante internationale verdra-
gen en andere bronnen, en dus ook niet in relatie
tot art. 4 EVRM.
10. Als belangrijkste verdrag (“prevailing docu-
ment at the time”) in relatie tot het Roma-huwe-
lijk noemt het Hof de Convention on Consent to
Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and Reg-
istration of Marriages (New York, 10 december
1962, Trb. 1964, 55), dat het aan staten overlaat
om de leeftijdsgrens voor het huwelijk te bepa-
len. Dit verdrag is echter niet geratificeerd door

Italië, noch door Bulgarije. Daarnaast wordt dit
verdrag in de literatuur beschreven als het heb-
ben van “all the bite of a toothless man without
its dentures” als het om de bescherming van
kinderen tegen kindhuwelijken gaat (E. Warner,
‘Behind the Wedding Veil: Child Marriage as a
Form of Trafficking in Girls’, 12 Journal of Gen-
der, Social Policy & The Law 2004, p. 233-271,
op p. 250). Dochter M in deze zaak was minder-
jarig; 17 jaar en negen maanden, aldus de Ita-
liaanse autoriteiten en zoals verwoord door het
Hof “a few months away from adulthood” (par.
165). Het is de vraag of de leeftijdsgrens van
seksuele meerderjarigheid waar het Hof vervol-
gens naar verwijst – zestien jaar in Italië – het
meest relevante criterium is om een oordeel te
vellen over het karakter van het onderhavige
huwelijk. Het oordeel van het Hof op dit punt is
in ieder geval lastig te volgen, ook in het licht
van een eerdere overweging in het arrest waarin
het Hof zich bezorgd toont over de minderjarig-
heid van dochter M en daarbij aangeeft dat kin-
deren en andere kwetsbare personen recht
hebben op effectieve bescherming (par. 105). In
de context van een huwelijk blijft minderjarig-
heid kennelijk een relatief begrip waarbij de
grens niet per se bij achttien jaar ligt. Vanuit het
perspectief van de aanpak van mensenhandel
is de leeftijdsgrens van achttien jaar voor het
bepalen van meer- en minderjarigheid echter
een absolute, zo ook in het Verdrag van de Raad
van Europa inzake de bestrijding van mensen-
handel (Warschau, 16 mei 2005, Trb. 2006, 99)
waarin een kind wordt gedefinieerd als iedere
persoon jonger dan achttien jaar, evenals in de
EU-Richtlijn mensenhandel van 5 april 2011 (EU-
Richtlijn 2011/36/EU inzake voorkoming en be-
strijding van mensenhandel, PbEU 2011, L
101/1). In laatstgenoemd document worden
kinderen zelfs benoemd als bijzonder kwetsbare
personen, en geldt voor hen dan ook een aantal
beschermende bepalingen.
11. In Nederland is in ieder geval één zaak be-
kend waarin een verdachte terechtstond omdat
hij volgens het OM een bruid had gekocht en
het oogmerk had het meisje, dat i.c. jonger was
dan zestien jaar, uit te buiten. Een met slavernij
vergelijkbare praktijk is één van de genoemde
vormen van uitbuiting in het mensenhandelarti-
kel 273f lid 2 Sr, conform het VN Palermo Proto-
col. Zowel de verdachte als het vermeende
slachtoffer hadden in deze zaak verklaard dat er

Sdu UitgeversEuropean Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 122680

Uitspraken EHRM«EHRC»221



bij Roma regels zijn voor het kopen van een
bruid, waarbij werd verwezen naar het uit 2006
daterende boek van M. Eycken, Roma-zigeuners
overleven in een industriële samenleving. Ver-
dachte had zich niet gehouden aan de regels
beschreven in dit werk. Daarom concludeerde
het OM dat verdachte wist dat het huwelijk niet
vrijwillig was en dat hij het oogmerk had zich
een vijftienjarig meisje toe te eigenen als zijn
eigendom en haar in een van hem en zijn familie
afhankelijke situatie te houden. Verdachte had
– aldus het OM – het meisje vervoerd in zijn au-
to, gehuisvest in het huis van zijn moeder, seks
met haar gehad en haar identiteitsbewijs afge-
nomen, dit alles met het oogmerk van uitbuiting.
De rechtbank sprak verdachte vrij van mensen-
handel, onder meer omdat het meisje en ver-
dachte beiden hadden verklaard dat het in de
Roma-cultuur gebruikelijk is om geld te betalen
voor een bruid. Ook hadden beiden verklaard
dat verdachte niet op de hoogte was van het feit
dat het meisje (aangeefster) niet wilde. De
rechtbank oordeelt vervolgens: “Wat er ook zij
van de wijze waarop verdachte een huwelijks-
partner heeft gezocht niet is gebleken dat ver-
dachte enige opzet had [betrokkene] tegen haar
wil aan zich te binden. Evenmin is gebleken van
enige dwang of misleiding. De rechtbank is te-
vens van oordeel dat de moeder van verdachte
niet het oogmerk had om [betrokkene] gevangen
te houden. Dat zij in het bezit was van haar
identiteitsbewijs, impliceert niet zonder meer
dat deze als zekerheidstelling werd gebruikt”
(Rechtbank Utrecht 28 december 2009, LJN:
BK8230). Dwang is ten aanzien van minderjarige
slachtoffers van mensenhandel echter geen de-
lictsbestanddeel van art. 273f Sr (zie hierover
Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel, Mensen-
handel – Jurisprudentie mensenhandelzaken
2009-2012, Een analyse, Den Haag 2012, p. 26
en 51 e.v.).
12. Dit arrest maakt in ieder geval duidelijk dat
mensenhandel niet alleen tegen het licht van
art. 4 EVRM moet worden gehouden, maar ook
wordt gezien als een onmenselijke en vernede-
rende behandeling in de zin van art. 3 EVRM.
Een (positieve) onderzoeksplicht naar mensen-
handel vloeit niet alleen voort uit art. 4 – gezien
het Rantsev-arrest – maar ook uit art. 3 EVRM.
Het feit dat het Hof i.c. de klacht op grond van
art. 4 EVRM niet inhoudelijk behandelt, laat de
positieve verplichtingen die uit dit verdragsarti-

kel volgen onverlet. De plichten tot, onder meer,
onderzoek en bescherming gelden niet alleen
na reeds vastgestelde mensenhandelpraktijken
maar ook ten aanzien van situaties waarin
sprake is van mogelijke slachtoffers. Een belang-
rijke vraag blijft hoe cultuur en tradities zich
verhouden met kernwaarden die in deze bepa-
lingen besloten liggen wanneer sprake is van
een huwelijk waarbij ten minste één van de
partners minderjarig – jonger dan achttien jaar
– is. De onderhavige uitspraak van het Europees
Hof geeft hierop geen antwoord. De uitspraak
is echter nog niet definitief en er is gevraagd om
een hogere voorziening; mogelijk besluit het
panel van vijf de zaak nog voor te leggen aan
de Grote Kamer.

M. Boot-Matthijssen
Jurist, Bureau Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel

222
Europees Hof voor de Rechten van de Mens
28 augustus 2012, nr. 54270/10
(Tulkens (President), Popović, Berro-Lefèvre,
Sajó, Raimondi, Pinto de Albuquerque, Keller,
Jočienė, Karakaş)
Noot N.R. Koffeman LL.M

Privé- en gezinsleven. Algeheel verbod op pre-
implantatie genetische diagnostiek. Taaislijm-
ziekte. Incoherente wetgeving. Proportionali-
teit.

[EVRM art. 8, 14]

Mw. Costa en dhr. Pavan ontdekken in 2006 bij de
geboorte van hun dochter dat zij dragers zijn van
cystische fibrose (taaislijmziekte). Wanneer mw.
Costa in 2010 wederom zwanger raakt, laten zij de
vrucht onderzoeken. Als blijkt dat deze – net als
hun dochter – aan cystische fibrose lijdt, laten zij
op medische gronden abortus plegen. Costa en
Pavan willen nu graag een ivf-behandeling onder-
gaan, zodat het embryo vóór plaatsing in de baar-
moeder kan worden onderzocht middels zogenoem-
de pre-implantatie genetische diagnostiek (PGD).
Naar Italiaans recht is PGD echter verboden. Ivf-
behandeling is slechts toegankelijk voor onvrucht-
bare paren of voor paren waarbij de man een sek-
sueel overdraagbare aandoening heeft, zoals hiv
of hepatitis B of C. Deze regelgeving heeft tot doel

2681European Human Rights Cases 21-12-2012, afl. 12Sdu Uitgevers

222«EHRC»Uitspraken EHRM


