












































1 
 

Speech by Dutch National Rapporteur  

on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children  

Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen 

on the occasion of the COP UNTOC – GAATW side event 

Vienna, October 20, 2016 

 

The Prominent Role of Judges in Interpreting the International 

Definition of Human Trafficking 

 

 

Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. It is an honour to be in the company of 

such remarkable people and I would like to thank the organization for inviting 

me to speak today. 

 

The international definition of human trafficking of the UN’s Trafficking 

Protocol was drafted sixteen years ago, and it still causes controversy today. 

Many scholars and organizations have paid attention to the difficulties that the 

definition presents for the scope of human trafficking. But little attention has 

been paid to the national interpretations and applications of the Protocol’s 

definition. National courts and their judges are crucial in interpreting the 

international definition of human trafficking, and cannot be overlooked. 

That’s what my colleague and I find in our article. We specifically look at the 

role of Dutch courts in outlining the definition of human trafficking. We firstly 

take a closer look at transnational criminal law to improve the understanding 

of the interaction between international definitions and national judges. We 



2 
 

secondly look at how Dutch judges interpreted two elements of the definition: 

‘abuse of a position of vulnerability’ and ‘purpose of exploitation’.  

Within international law, human trafficking is seen as a transnational crime. 

Transnational crimes are dealt with in transnational criminal law. This type of 

law entails that both international and national actors have a responsibility in 

realizing an effective approach of crimes like human trafficking. On the one 

hand, the international level prescribes the definition of human trafficking. On 

the other hand, national legislatures must take steps to criminalise human 

trafficking and judges subsequently interpret and apply the international 

definition.  

So the definition of human trafficking takes center stage. The more vague, the 

more ways domestic courts have to interpret and determine the scope of the 

definition. The current definition of human trafficking is considerably open. 

You can see this as problematic, because it causes little legal certainty. But, you 

can also see this in a more positive light: it can be an invitation to domestic 

courts to expand on the precise meaning of human trafficking in their 

respective local contexts.  

 

So how did Dutch courts deal with this invitation? In the Netherlands, human 

trafficking for the purposes of sexual exploitation was already an offence under 

Dutch criminal law when the protocol was drafted. After its drafting, Dutch 

legislators widened the range of human trafficking and aligned it with 

international law. Currently, human trafficking is a criminal offence under 

Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code and reads almost exactly the same as 

the Protocol Definition, namely: human trafficking involves (1) an action (2) by 

certain means and with a specific intention (the criminal intent) (3) the 



3 
 

purpose of exploitation. 

 

Dutch Supreme Court has shed more light on how components of the human 

trafficking definition should be interpreted. For instance, ‘abuse of a position of 

vulnerability’, according to the Protocol,  is understood ‘as referring to any 

situation in which the person involved has no real or acceptable alternative but 

to submit to the abuse involved’. This means that in every individual case, it 

has to be established whether there was a position of vulnerability, and, if so, 

whether the suspect (intentionally) abused that position. This however raises a 

question: what kind of intentional involvement is required to prove the 

accused’s abuse of an established vulnerability?  

In 2009, Dutch Supreme Court ruled that the conscious use of someone’s 

vulnerable position already constitutes abuse of that position. This is the ‘use 

equals abuse’ doctrine. To provide an illustration of this, think of an illegal 

immigrant who begs a restaurant owner for a job. According to the Supreme 

Court, employing an illegal immigrant despite knowing about his vulnerable 

position, is already enough to prove that the restaurant owner abused the 

vulnerable position.  

Not all countries would rule the same. Some would decide that the restaurant 

owner didn’t persuade the illegal immigrant to come work for them, but 

merely responded to the illegal immigrant’s request. The scope of abuse of a 

vulnerable position is therefore quite wide: some countries have a lower 

threshold than others. In the Netherlands, a lower form of criminal intent is 

enough to establish abuse of a vulnerable position.  

So what about the purpose of exploitation? How can we establish that a 

person specifically intended to exploit another person? Suspects generally 



4 
 

remain silent about their intentions, and in those cases, the court is compelled 

to establish intent on the basis of available evidence. But how can this 

evidence be established? Dutch Supreme court does not differentiate between 

the various forms of exploitations listed in the Palermo Protocol and the 

definitions of them that already exist at the international level or in national 

law itself, but formulated a number of factors that should apply in assessing 

the different forms of exploitation. Some of the factors that can be assessed 

are the nature and duration of the work, the limitations posed onto the 

individual concerned, and the economic advantage accruing to the employer. 

Not all of these factors have to apply, but these factors can be weighed against 

each other. For example, in some situations an employer might enjoy a major 

financial advantage but imposes relatively few limitations on the victim. In 

other cases, it might not be the profit that stands out, but the amount of hours 

worked and the limitations that the situation imposed on the employee. In 

2015, Dutch Supreme Court even added that the weighing can be different 

when the victim is a minor, and that lower courts must consider this as an 

important factor.  

 

So our article demonstrates this: domestic courts have room to interpret and 

apply the definition of human trafficking in their own contexts. The interaction 

between international and national law in cases involving transnational 

criminal law, as is the case with regard to human trafficking, is an interaction of 

mutual dependence. Scholars, in my opinion, have focused too much on the 

international definition of human trafficking, and not on how human trafficking 

is viewed in countries themselves.  

Whether you agree with the point of view that every country’s courts should 

decide for themselves how to further interpret the international definition of 



5 
 

human trafficking, or whether you agree with the point of view that this 

defeats the purpose of developing a universal understanding of human 

trafficking, one thing is clear: we need to be place more emphasis on the role 

of national judges, and on courts’ national interpretations of international 

definitions of human trafficking.  

 

Thank you for your attention.  


