





































Microsoft Word - NRM JvdS 12-02-08 Fifth Report Rapporteur def.doc


TRAFFICKING IN 
HUMAN BEINGS 

 

Fifth Report of the Dutch National Rapporteur 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
C.E. Dettmeijer-Vermeulen (Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings) 
 

M. Boot-Matthijssen 

E.M.H. van Dijk 

H. de Jonge van Ellemeet 

D.A.C. Koster 

M. Smit 
 





 iii 

Contents 

OVERVIEW OF TABLES IX 
ABBREVIATIONS USED XI 
FOREWORD  XIX 

1  INTRODUCTION 1 

1.1 Introduction 1 
1.2 The National Action Plan on (Combating) Human Trafficking 1 
1.3 Prevention 2 
1.4 Dealing with the demand side 3 
1.5 Collecting information on human trafficking 5 
1.6 This report 8 

2  LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 9 

2.1 Introduction 9 
2.2 National legislation and regulations 9 
2.2.1 The new THB provision 9 
2.2.2 Amendments to the B-9 regulation 15 
2.2.3 Aliens Employment Act 17 
2.2.4 Other (imminent) legislation and regulations 18 
2.3 International 22 
2.3.1 Introduction 22 
2.3.2 United Nations 22 
2.3.3 European Union 26 
2.3.4 Council of Europe 32 
2.3.5 Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) 37 
2.4 Points of attention and bottlenecks 38 

3  VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 41 

3.1 Introduction 41 
3.2 Victims 41 
3.2.1 Some specific (risk) groups 41 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 iv 

3.2.2 Victims ‘in numbers’ 47 
3.3 Facilities available to victims 53 
3.3.1 General developments and facilities 53 
3.3.2 Specific assistance bodies and initiatives 64 
3.4 Dealing with juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem 67 
3.4.1 Local initiatives 68 
3.4.2 National institutions, projects and initiatives 69 
3.5 Points of attention and bottlenecks 72 

4  ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT IN THE PROSTITUTION SECTOR 75 

4.1 Introduction 75 
4.2 Developments in the sex industry 75 
4.3 Administrative enforcement 78 
4.3.1 Preventive enforcement 78 
4.3.2 Supervision 80 
4.3.3 Repressive enforcement 82 
4.3.4 Amendment of legislation and regulations 83 
4.4 Points of attention and bottlenecks 84 

5  INVESTIGATION 87 

5.1 Introduction 87 
5.2 National developments (including policy developments) and initiatives 87 
5.2.1 Police 87 
5.2.2 Royal Netherlands Marechaussee 88 
5.2.3 Special Investigation Services and Inspection Services 89 
5.3 Identifying (possible) THB situations 89 
5.4 Investigation of THB 95 
5.5 Investigations: the data (BNRM police study) 98 
5.5.1 Investigations into THB 99 
5.5.2 Victims 100 
5.6 International developments 102 
5.7 Points of attention and bottlenecks 104 



CONTENTS 

 v 

6  FINANCIAL INVESTIGATIONS 107 

6.1 Introduction 107 
6.2 Financial investigations, illegally obtained profits and confiscation 107 
6.2.1 What is financial investigation? 107 
6.2.2 What are illegally obtained profits? 108 
6.2.3 What is confiscation? 109 
6.3 National (policy) developments in the area of financial investigations and 

confiscation 111 
6.3.1 Developments in the area of financial investigations 111 
6.3.2 Developments in the area of confiscation 112 
6.4 Results of BNRM police study: financial investigations 113 
6.4.1 Financial detection methods 113 
6.4.2 Collaboration and information exchange 117 
6.4.3 Dilemmas in financial investigation 120 
6.5 Results of BNRM police study: illegally obtained profits 124 
6.5.1 Extent of illegally obtained profits 124 
6.5.2 Prejudgment seizure 124 
6.5.3 Siphoning and money laundering 125 
6.6 Results of BNRM police study: confiscation 125 
6.6.1 Confiscation in THB cases completed in 2003 125 
6.6.2 Confiscation in THB cases completed in 2004 128 
6.7 Results of BNRM police study: compensation to victims 128 
6.8 Points of attention and bottlenecks 129 

7  THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 131 

7.1 Introduction 131 
7.2 Policy developments 131 
7.2.1 Policy-oriented and organisational embedding of the approach 131 
7.2.2 Practical points of departure 132 
7.3 Research results 133 
7.3.1 Cases of THB registered with the Public Prosecution Service 134 
7.3.2 The suspects 137 
7.3.3 Cases dealt with by the Public Prosecution Service 139 
7.3.4 Settlement by the court 140 
7.3.5 Appeal? 145 
7.4 International developments 145 
7.4.1 International collaboration 145 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 vi 

7.4.2 Eurojust 146 
7.5 Points of attention and bottlenecks 146 

8  EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 149 

8.1 Introduction 149 
8.2 BNRM study into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 149 
8.2.1 Definition of terms 149 
8.2.2 The reasons for the BNRM study 150 
8.2.3 Response 151 
8.3 Exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry in the sense of THB 152 
8.3.1 Legal perspective 152 
8.3.2 Indicators of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry 153 
8.3.3 Labour and services 155 
8.4 Case descriptions 157 
8.4.1 Preliminary remarks 157 
8.4.2 Qualifying criterion for the cases 157 
8.4.3 Categorisation of the cases 159 
8.5 Risk sectors 164 
8.5.1 Introduction 164 
8.5.2 Relevant sectors 166 
8.5.3 Discussion of the sectors in question 167 
8.6 Groups at risk 180 
8.6.1 Introduction 180 
8.6.2 Characteristics of (potential) victims 180 
8.6.3 Characteristics of (potential) perpetrators 186 
8.7 Points of attention and bottlenecks when dealing with exploitation outside the 

sex industry 186 
8.7.1 Introduction 186 
8.7.2 Points of attention and bottlenecks 187 

9  TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS FOR THE PURPOSE OF ORGAN REMOVAL 191 

9.1 Introduction 191 
9.2 State of affairs and developments 192 
9.2.1 Organ donation and trade in organs 192 
9.2.2 THB with a view to organ removal 197 
9.3 Exploratory research among medical practitioners 198 
9.4 Points of attention and bottlenecks 200 



CONTENTS 

 vii 

10  RECOMMENDATIONS 201 

11  SUMMARY 211 

11.1 Introduction 211 
11.2 Legislation and regulations 211 
11.2.1 Human trafficking in the Dutch Criminal Code 211 
11.2.2 B-9 regulation 212 
11.2.3 Other primary and subordinate legislation 212 
11.2.4 International developments 213 
11.3 Administrative enforcement in the sex industry 214 
11.3.1 Developments in the sex industry 214 
11.3.2 Preventive enforcement 214 
11.3.3 Administrative supervision 215 
11.3.4 Repressive administrative enforcement 215 
11.3.5 A more sharply focussed statutory framework 216 
11.4 Victims 216 
11.4.1 Specific (risk) groups 216 
11.4.2 Victims ‘in numbers’ 216 
11.5 Assistance 217 
11.5.1 System-oriented operation 217 
11.5.2 Victim reception 217 
11.5.3 Dealing with juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem 218 
11.5.4 Some assistance organisations 218 
11.6 Investigation and prosecution 219 
11.6.1 (Policy) developments in investigation and prosecution 219 
11.6.2 Indications of human trafficking 220 
11.6.3 Investigation 221 
11.6.4 Financial investigations 222 
11.6.5 Prosecution 223 
11.7 Exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 224 
11.7.1 Definition of terms 224 
11.7.2 The criterion for exploitation used 224 
11.7.3 Risk sectors 224 
11.7.4 Characteristics and risk groups 225 
11.7.5 Dealing with exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 225 
11.8 Human trafficking with a view to organ removal 226 
11.8.1 Organ donation 226 
11.8.2 Trade in organs 226 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 viii 

11.8.3 Human trafficking with a view to organ removal 226 
11.8.4 Interviews among medical practitioners 227 
11.9 Conclusion: recommendations 227 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 229 
APPENDIX 1  THB PROVISION IN THE DUTCH CRIMINAL CODE 241 
APPENDIX 2  JUSTIFICATION OF RESEARCH METHODS USED 243 

1 The B9 research 243 
2 The BNRM police study 244 
3 The BNRM research into financial investigations 244 
4 The Public Prosecution Service data investigation 246 
5 The BNRM research into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 248 

APPENDIX 3  EXPLANATION OF TABLES AND STATISTICS 251 
APPENDIX 4  SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES 253 
 



 ix 

Overview of Tables 

TABLE 3.1 MAJOR COUNTRIES OF ORIGIN OF VICTIMS SHOWING ANNUAL 
RANKINGS  48 

TABLE 3.2 MOST IMPORTANT COUNTRIES OF ORIGIN OF (POSSIBLE) VICTIMS 
REGISTERED WITH THE STV, PER ANNUM 48 

TABLE 3.3 AGE DISTRIBUTION OF VICTIMS REPORTED TO THE STV, PER ANNUM 49 
TABLE 3.4 AGE DISTRIBUTION OF PERSONS WITH A B-9 PERMIT (APPLICATION), 

2005 51 
TABLE 3.5 NATIONALITY OF PERSONS WITH A B-9 PERMIT (APPLICATION), 2005 52 
TABLE 3.6 REGION OF ORIGIN OF PERSONS WITH A B-9 PERMIT (APPLICATION), 

2005 53 
TABLE 5.1 INVESTIGATIONS INTO THB COMPLETED EACH YEAR ACCORDING TO 

THB TYPE 99 
TABLE 5.2 REPORTS AND WITNESS STATEMENTS MADE BY VICTIMS (IN THB 

INVESTIGATIONS SENT TO THE PPS), PER ANNUM AND TYPE OF THB 100 
TABLE 5.3 UNDERAGE VICTIMS (IN THB INVESTIGATIONS SENT TO THE PPS), PER 

ANNUM AND TYPE OF THB 101 
TABLE 6.2 ILLEGALLY OBTAINED PROFITS, PER YEAR 124 
TABLE 7.1 NUMBER OF CASES REGISTERED AND CASES (ALSO) INVOLVING 

UNDERAGE VICTIMS, PER ANNUM 134 
TABLE 7.2 TYPE OF THB, FOR EACH YEAR OF REGISTRATION 135 
TABLE 7.3 MOST SERIOUS OFFENCES, PER YEAR OF REGISTRATION 136 
TABLE 7.4 COUNTRY OF BIRTH OF SUSPECTS, PER YEAR OF REGISTRATION 137 
TABLE 7.5 RANKING OF THE MOST PREVALENT COUNTRIES OF BIRTH OF 

SUSPECTS, PER YEAR OF REGISTRATION 138 
TABLE 7.6 PRE-TRIAL DETENTION, PER YEAR OF REGISTRATION 139 
TABLE 7.7 CASES DEALT WITH BY THE PPS, PER YEAR IN WHICH THE CASES WERE 

DEALT WITH 139 
TABLE 7.8 SETTLEMENT IN THE FIRST INSTANCE, PER YEAR OF SETTLEMENT 141 
TABLE 7.9 SETTLEMENT FOR MOST SERIOUS CRIME, PER YEAR OF SETTLEMENT 141 
TABLE 7.10 SENTENCE IMPOSED FOR MOST SERIOUS CRIME, PER YEAR OF 

SETTLEMENT 143 
TABLE 7.11 APPEAL LODGED, PER YEAR OF SETTLEMENT (AT THE FIRST INSTANCE) 145 
TABLE 8.1 RESPONSE RATE PER CATEGORY TO BNRM QUESTIONNAIRES 151 
TABLE 8.2 KEY FIGURES CONTACTED DIRECTLY 152 
TABLE 8.3 CLASSIFICATION OF CASES 159 
TABLE 8.4 NUMBER OF CASES WITH INDICATIONS OF EXPLOITATION, PER SECTOR 166 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 x 

TABLE 8.5 NUMBER OF CASES REGARDING SITUATIONS INVOLVING 
EXPLOITATION, PER SECTOR 167 

TABLE B3.2 NATIONALITY OF (POSSIBLE) VICTIMS REGISTERED WITH THE STV, PER 
ANNUM 253 

TABLE B3.6 NATIONALITY OF PERSONS WITH A B-9 PERMIT (APPLICATION), 2005 256 
TABLE B7.5 COUNTRIES OF BIRTH OF SUSPECTS, PER YEAR OF REGISTRATION 257 
 



 xi 

Abbreviations used 

AECT Alliance Expert Coordination Team 
AG Advocaat-Generaal 
 Advocate General 
AI Arbeidsinspectie 
 Health and Safety Inspectorate 
AID Algemene Inspectiedienst 
 General Inspectorate Service 
AIV Adviesraad Internationale Vraagstukken 
 Advisory Council on International Affairs 
Ama Alleenstaande minderjarige asielzoeker 
 Unacompanied underage asylum seeker 
AMF-teams Arbeidsmarktfraude-teams 
 Labour market fraud teams 
AMK Advies- en Meldpunt Kindermishandeling 
 Child Abuse Advisory and Reporting Centre 
AMV Alleenstaande minderjarige vreemdeling 
 Unaccompanied underage foreign national 
ANWB Algemeen Nederlandse Wielrijders Bond 
 Dutch Automobile Association 
APV Algemene Plaatselijke Verordening 
 General Municipal Ordinance 
ARBO Arbeidsomstandigheden 
 Working Conditions  
ASC American Society of Criminology 
ATAU Anti-Trafficking Assistance Unit 
BD Belastingsdienst 
 Tax Administration 
BFO Bureau Financiële Ondersteuning 
 Financial Support Bureau 
BFR Bureau Financiële Recherche 
 Financial Investigations Bureau 
BLinN Bonded Labour in the Netherlands 
BNRM Bureau Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel 
 Office of the Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in 

Human Beings 
BOD Bijzondere opsporingsdienst 
 Special Investigation Service 
BOOM Bureau Ontnemingswetgeving Openbaar Ministerie 
 Public Prosecution Service Criminal Assets Confiscation 

Bureau 
BR Bovenregionale Recherche 
 Supra-regional Crime Squad 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 xii 

BuZa Ministerie van Buitenlandse Zaken 
 Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
BW Burgerlijk Wetboek 
 Dutch Civil Code 
BZK Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties 
 Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations 
CAHTEH Committee on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings 
CAO Collectieve arbeidsovereenkomst 
 Collective Labour Agreement 
CARIN Camden Asset Recovery Inter-Agency Network 
CBA Criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse 
 Crime Projection Analysis 
CBS Centraal Bureau voor de Statistiek 
 Statistics Netherlands 
CC (Dutch) Criminal Code 
CDPC European Committee on Crime Problems 
CEDAW Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination 

Against Women 
CGKR Centrum voor Gelijkheid van Kansen en voor Racismebestrijding 
 Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism 
CIE Criminele Inlichtingen Eenheid 
 Criminal Intelligence Unit 
CIROC Centre for Information and Research on Organised Crime 
CJIB Centraal Justitieel Incasso Bureau 
 Central Judicial Collection Agency 
CNV Christelijk Nationaal Vakverbond 
 Christian National Union 
COA Centraal Orgaan opvang Asielzoekers 
 Central Agency for the Reception of Asylum Seekers 
CTOC Convention against Transnational Organised Crime 
DCI Defence for Children International 
DINPOL Dienst Internationale Politiesamenwerking 
 International Police Cooperation Service 
dNP de Nederlandse Politie 
 The Dutch Police 
dNRI dienst Nationale Recherche Informatie 
 National Crime Intelligence Service 
EC Europese Commissie 
 European Commission 
ECD Economische Controledienst 
 Economic Audit Service 
ECPAT End Child Prostitution, Child Pornography and the Trafficking 

of Children for Sexual Purposes 
EG Europese Gemeenschap 
 European Community 
EHRM Europees Hof voor de Rechten van de Mens 
 European Court of Human Rights 



ABBREVIATIONS USED 

 xiii 

EK Eerste Kamer 
 Upper House (of the Dutch parliament) 
EMM Expertisecentrum Mensenhandel en Mensensmokkel 
 Expertise Centre on THB and People Smuggling 
EP Europees Parlement 
 European Parliament 
ER Europese Raad 
 European Council 
EU Europese Unie 
 European Union 
Eurojust Europees orgaan voor de justitiële samenwerking 
 European Union Judicial Cooperation Unit 
Europol Europese politie 
 European Police Office  
EVRM Europees Verdrag tot bescherming van de rechten van de mens 
 European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights 
FIOD Fiscale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst 
 Fiscal Information and Investigation Service 
FIOD/ECD Fiscale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst/Economische 

Controledienst 
 Fiscal Information & Investigation Service/Economic Audit 

Service 
FIU-NL Financial Intelligence Unit 
FNV Federatie van Nederlandse Vakbewegingen 
 Dutch Trade Union Federation 
FO Federatie Opvang 
 Federation of Reception Shelters 
FP Functioneel Parket 
 National Public Prosecutor’s Office for Economic and 

Environmental Offences 
GA General Assembly 
GAATW Global Alliance Against Trafficking in Women 
GBA Gemeentelijke Basisadministratie persoonsgegevens 
 Municipal Personal Records Database 
GAO Government Accountability Office (United States)  
GGD Gemeentelijke Gezondheidsdienst 
 Municipal Health Service 
GG&GD Gemeentelijke Geneeskundige- en Gezondheidsdiensten 
 Municipal Medical and Health Services 
GGZ Geestelijke Gezondheidszorg Nederland 
 Netherlands Institute for Psychological Care 
GOC Grensoverschrijdende Criminaliteitsteam 
 Cross-border Crime Squad 
HON Handhaven Op Niveau 

Quality Enforcement Project  
HR Hoge Raad 
 Dutch Supreme Court 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 xiv 

HVO Querido Hulp voor Onbehuisden Querido 
 Querido Help for the Homeless 
ICMPD International Centre for Migration Policy Development 
IGO Informatie Gestuurde Opsporing 
 Information-led investigation 
IKP-S Informatie Knooppunt Politie Systeem 
 Police Information Node System 
ILO International Labour Organisation 
IND Immigratie- en Naturalisatiedienst 
 Immigration and Naturalisation Service 
IOOV Inspectie Openbare Orde en Veiligheid 
 Public Order and Security Inspectorate 
IOM International Organisation for Migration 
IRC Internationale Rechtshulp Centra 
 International Legal Assistance Centres 
JBZ(-Raad) (Raad van ministers van) Justitie en Binnenlandse Zaken 
 (Council of Ministers of) Justice and the Interior 
JIT Joint Investigation Team 
JJI Justitiële Jeugdinrichtingen 
 Judicial Institutions for Juvenile Persons 
JOS (project) Juridische Opvang Slachtoffers seksueel geweld 
 Legal Assistance for Victims of Sexual Violence 
KLPD Korps Landelijke Politie Diensten 
 National Police Services Agency 
KMar Koninklijke Marechaussee 
 Royal Netherlands Marechaussee 
LEM Landelijke Expertgroep Mensenhandel 
 National Expert Group on Trafficking in Human Beings 
LJN Landelijk Jurisprudentie Nummer 
 National Case-law Number 
LOGO Landelijk Overleg Gemeentebesturen Opvang en terugkeerbeleid 
 National Consultative Body for Municipal Administrations on 

reception and returns policy 
LOS Landelijke Ongedocumenteerden Stichting 
 National Foundation for Undocumented Migrants 
LOvJ mensenhandel Landelijk Officier Mensensmokkel en Mensenhandel 
 National Public Prosecutor for THB and People Smuggling 
LP Landelijk Parket 
 National Office of the Public Prosecution Service 
M. Stichting Meld Misdaad Anoniem 
 Report Crime Anonymously = Crimestoppers 
MOB Met onbekende bestemming 
 destination unknown 
MOT Meldpunt Ongebruikelijke Transacties 
 Centre for Reporting Unusual Transactions 
MOE-landen Midden en Oost-Europese landen 
 Central and Eastern european countries 



ABBREVIATIONS USED 

 xv 

MvT Memorie van toelichting 
 Explanatory Memorandum 
NAM Nationaal Actieplan Mensenhandel 
 National Action Plan on (Combating) THB 
NCIPS Nederlands Centrum voor Internationale Politiesamenwerking 
 Netherlands Centre for International Police Cooperation 
NGO Niet-gouvernementele organisatie 
 Non-governmental organisation 
NIGZ Nationaal Instituut voor Gezondheidsbevordering en Ziektepreventie 
 National Institute for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention 
NJCM Nederlands Juristen Comité voor de Mensenrechten 
 Dutch Section of the International Commission of Jurists 
NeBeDeAgPol Nederland België Deutschland Arbeitsgesellschaft Polizei 
 Netherlands, Belgium and Germany Police Union 
NPI Nederlands Politie Instituut 
 Netherlands Police Institute 
NR Nationale Recherche 
 National Crime Squad 
NRI Nationale Recherche Informatie 
 National Crime Intelligence Service 
NRM Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel 
 National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 
NRM1 Eerste rapportage van de Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel 
 First NRM Report 
NRM3 Derde rapportage van de Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel 
 Third NRM Report 
NRM4 Vierde rapportage van de Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel 
 Fourth NRM Report 
OCTA Organised Crime Threat Assessment 
OKIA Ondersteuningskomitee Illegale Arbeiders 
 Support Committee for Illegal Workers 
OM Openbaar Ministerie 
 Public Prosecution Service 
OOM Operationeel Overleg Mensenhandel 
 Operational Consultation Group on Trafficking in Human 

Beings 
OR Ondernemingsraad 
 Works Council 
OSCE Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
OSR OSCE Special Representative 
OvJ Officier van Justitie 
 Public Prosecutor 
OVSE Organisatie voor Veiligheid en Samenwerking in Europa 
 Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe 
PA Parliamentary Assembly 
PaG Parket-Generaal 
 National Public Prosecutor’s Office 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 xvi 

PbEG Publicatieblad van de Europese Gemeenschapen 
 Official Journal of the European Community 
PC-ES Committee of Experts on the Protection of Children against 

Sexual Exploitation and Abuse 
PG Procureur-Generaal 
 Procurator General 
PLEXA Project beëindiging leefgelden van ex-ama’s 
 Project on the termination of allowances for former 

unaccompanied underage asylum seekers 
PPM/dNP Project Prostitutie Mensenhandel/de Nederlandse Politie 
 National Police Project on Prostitution and Trafficking in 

Human Beings  
PPS Public Prosecution Service 
PMW Prostitutie Maatschappelijk Werk 
 Prostitution Social Work 
REAN Return and Emigration of Aliens from the Netherlands 
RIAGG Regionale Instellingen voor Ambulante Geestelijke Gezondheidszorg 
 Regional Institute for Community Mental Healthcare 
RRI Randstad Return Initiative 
RvE Raad van Europa 
 Council of Europe 
RvdK Raad voor de Kinderbescherming 
 Child Protection Board 
SAMAH Stichting Alleenstaande Minderjarige Asielzoekers Humanitas 
 Foundation for Unaccompanied Minor Asylum Seekers, 

Humanitas 
SGBO Onderzoeks- en Adviesbureau van de Vereniging van Nederlandse 

Gemeenten 
 Research and Advice Bureau of the Association of Dutch 

Municipalities 
SiBa Statistische informatievoorziening en Beleidsanalyse 
 Statistical Data and Policy Analysis Unit 
SIOD Sociale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst 
 Social Information and Investigation Service  
SK Scharlaken Koord 
 The Scarlet Cord 
Sr Strafrecht 
 Criminal Law 
Stb Staatsblad 
 State Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 
SRTV Stichting Religieuzen Tegen Vrouwenhandel 
 Dutch Foundation of the Religious against Trafficking in 

Women 
Stcrt Staatscourant 
 Government Gazette 



ABBREVIATIONS USED 

 xvii 

STV Stichting Tegen Vrouwenhandel 
 Dutch Foundation against Trafficking in Women 
Sv Strafvordering 
 Criminal Procedure 
SZW Ministerie van Sociale Zaken en Werkgelegenheid 
 Social Affairs and Employment 
TA Tax Authority 
TIP rapport Trafficking in Persons Report 
THB Trafficking in Human Beings 
TK Tweede Kamer 
 Lower House (of the Dutch parliament) 
TNV Tijdelijke Noodvoorziening Vreemdelingen 
 Temporary Aliens Emergency Facilities 
Trb Tractatenblad 
 Treaty Series 
UN United Nations 
UNHCR United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
UNICEF United Nations Children’s Fund 
UNODC United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime 
UNTS United Nations Treaty Series 
UK United Kingdom 
UWV Uitvoering Werknemersverzekeringen 
 Social Security Agency 
Vb Vreemdelingenbesluit 
 Aliens Decree 
Vc Vreemdelingencirculaire 
 Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines 
V & I Vreemdelingenzaken en Integratie 
 Immigration and Integration 
VN Verenigde Naties 
 United Nations 
VNG Vereniging Nederlandse Gemeenten 
 Association of Netherlands Municipalities 
VROM Ministerie van Volkshuisvesting Ruimtelijke Ordening en 

Milieubeheer 
 Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environmental 

Management 
VROM/IOD Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst van het ministerie van VROM 
 Information and Investigation Service of the Ministry of VROM 
VWS Volksgezondheid, Welzijn en Sport 
 Public Health, Welfare and Sport 
WAADI Wet allocatie arbeidskrachten door intermediairs 
 Act on Allocation of Manpower by Intermediaries 
WAV Wet arbeid vreemdelingen 
 Aliens Employment Act 
Wet BIBOB Wet bevordering integriteitsbeoordeling door het openbaar bestuur 
 Public Administration (Probity Screening) Act 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 xviii

WODC Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek- en Documentatiecentrum 
 Scientific Research and Documentation Centre 
WOD Wet op de orgaandonatie 
 Organ Donation Act 
WSG Wet Schadefonds Geweldsmisdrijven 
 Violent Offences Compensation Fund Act 
WVS Wet voorkoming schijnhuwelijken 
 Marriages of Convenience (Prevention) Act 
WvSr Wetboek van Strafrecht 
 Dutch Criminal Code 
WvSv Wetboek van Strafvordering 
 Dutch Code of Criminal Procedure 
ZM Zittende Magistratuur 
 Judiciary 
 
 



 xix 

Foreword 

On 15 June 2007 I presented the fifth Report of the National Rapporteur to the Dutch gov-
ernment. This is a slightly modified and abridged version of the Report. In this Report you 
will find that, apart from the usual topics, attention has been especially devoted to the three 
following subjects: financial investigations, human trafficking with a view to organ removal 
and labour exploitation outside the sex industry.  

Labour exploitation outside the sex industry has become a criminal offence in the Nether-
lands as of 1 January 2005. The legislation does not provide a clear dividing line between bad 
employment and slavery like situations. It is entrusted to the judiciary to further define the 
concept of labour exploitation.  

An important leading decision in this area is the judgment of the European Court of Human 
rights of 26 July 2005, in the case of Siliadin v France. I hope that the descriptions of cases in 
Chapter 8 of my Report will also form a source of reference.  

Recently three judgments at first instance have been rendered in the Netherlands. These 
cases involved the harvesting of hemp plants, a Chinese restaurant and cleaning. All three 
cases resulted in an acquittal on human trafficking charges, with convictions for offences re-
lated to human trafficking. Two of these are still under appeal. Clearly, the definition of la-
bour exploitation outside the sex industry requires further research. I intend to keep a close 
watch on the development of case law in this area.  

The position of the victim remains a matter of continuing concern. Some improvements 
have been made in the sphere of residency status; however, many improvements related to 
the victim’s position in the framework of criminal law and procedure still need to be under-
taken. It remains for example perpetually difficult for victims to obtain redress and compen-
sation for tangible and intangible losses. I propose to undertake further research into the vic-
tim’s position, particularly regarding criminal law and procedure and compensation.  

The topic of human trafficking is high on the agenda in the Netherlands and people are 
working hard to put policy into practice. But it is not yet sufficient. During a recent major 
police investigation, many victims of human trafficking were identified in the licensed pros-
titution industry. More than six years after lifting the general ban on brothels, it appears that 
not enough measures have as yet been taken – or perhaps not enforced adequately enough – 
to free the sex industry from forced prostitution. This has prompted me into recommending 
the development of a stronger national legislative framework for prostitution policy.  



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 xx 

This shows that there is still quite enough work to be done.  
While it is obviously important to keep human trafficking high on the various agendas, this 
will only have a real impact if policy is put (even) more into practice. I hope that my recom-
mendations will assist in these objectives.  

My report covers the situation in he Netherlands and my recommendations are aimed at the 
Dutch government. Human trafficking is, however, a world wide problem, frequently in-
volving cross-border organised crime, and flagrant breaches of human rights of those indi-
viduals who are merely looking for a better life. There must be – and must continue to be – 
international attention to the macro-factors, which constitute the source and breeding 
ground for cross-border human trafficking.  

The research for the fifth report was set up and initiated before I took office. I therefore owe 
a large measure of thanks to my predecessor, and the founder of the BNRM, A.G. Korvinus. 

Various individuals have contributed to this report. Many co-operating organisations, in-
cluding the police, STV and the IND, have provided information, and BNRM owes them a 
debt of gratitude. A special word of thanks is due to Peter Paul Groen of the Statistical In-
formation Supply & Policy Analysis Department (SiBa) at WODC, who again undertook 
the analysis of the data provided from the Public Prosecution Service for this fifth report on 
trafficking in human beings. 

C.E. Dettmeijer-Vermeulen 
National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 
 



 1 

1 
 Introduction 

1.1 Introduction 

An important recent development was the entering into force of the new human trafficking 
article 273f in the Dutch Criminal Code. This legislative amendment brought new activities 
– in addition to those matters rendered criminal in the former article 250a of the Criminal 
Code – within the scope of criminal provision on trafficking in human beings (THB), includ-
ing exploitation in employment or services in sectors other than the sex industry and certain 
activities aimed at organ removal. This expansion has implications for many of the organisa-
tions that have joined the fight against THB: they must now also become involved in detect-
ing and/or prosecuting these ‘new’ forms of THB and identifying and assisting the victims in 
question. Furthermore, as a result of this expansion, there are some new chain partners in-
volved in these endeavours. In this context, it is beneficial that there is an increasingly clear 
effort to collaborate among all of the partners in the chain. This multi-agency approach is 
frequently described in the Netherlands as a ‘systematic approach’. A great deal of signifi-
cance is attached to this by the police, the Public Prosecution Service (PPS) and the social as-
sistance services. 

One consequence of the legislative changes is an expansion of operational scope for BNRM: 
the reports and recommendations have to cover a broader range of topics. This is partly why 
BNRM has come to devote more resources to studying specific themes instead of annually 
collecting quantitative data applying the same method, though this is also due to the fact that 
in the field of human trafficking (and how it is combated) new developments are continually 
occurring, and new questions are arising, which demand and justify topical research. 
In concrete terms, this means that the present report devotes less attention to detection and 
investigation of THB in a general sense, focusing rather on three specific topics, namely fi-
nancial investigations, exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry, and human traf-
ficking with the intention of removing organs. 

1.2 The National Action Plan on (Combating) Human Trafficking  

The National Action Plan on (Combating) Human Trafficking [Nationaal Actieplan 
Mensenhandel (NAM)] was submitted by the Cabinet to the Lower House on 20 December 
2004. The plan, which also formed the Cabinet’s reaction to the recommendations in the 
third Report of the National Rapporteur, was presented as a dynamic document. On 17 Feb-
ruary 2006, the Minister of Justice submitted the Additional Measures to the Action Plan to 
the Lower House. These measures related primarily to victims who are minors, and to child 
prostitution, but, in addition, covered the topics of prevention, reporting and registration as 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 2 

well as investigation and prosecution, also for exploitation in other sectors than in the sex 
industry. In a response to the NAM, BNRM welcomed the fact that an Action Plan had been 
prepared.  

Much has happened since the third Report and the NAM. There are also, however, issues on 
which no significant progress has yet been made. Three comments on the NAM have not 
yet lost anything of their topicality: 
– the provision of reception and assistance in certain cases to victims who are unwill-

ing to cooperate in police investigations and prosecution, or who dare not do so, is 
primarily viewed from the perspective of asking what the benefit is for the police and 
justice systems, rather than, as it should be, from the perspective of the victim; 

– adequate protection of victims should also, but not exclusively, be considered in the 
context of their return to their countries of origin; 

– national overviews of the results of administrative checks and interventions in the 
prostitution industry (insofar as relevant in relation to THB) are useful for criminal 
law enforcement in the context of combating THB. These overviews should be pre-
pared on an ongoing basis and not just at a single point in time in the context of 
‘monitoring’ the abolition of the general ban on brothels. 

In relation to these sorts of issues, improved direction, for instance from a multidisciplinary 
Human Trafficking Task Force, might very well play a stimulating and facilitating role. 

1.3 Prevention 

Prevention is better than cure. The same applies to human trafficking. Prevention is there-
fore an important topic,1 yet there is no separate chapter devoted to it in this Report. This is 
not because nothing is being done about prevention in the Netherlands. In fact a lot is being 
done, including: 
– the production of information films (such as the film Anna, commissioned by the 

Dutch Foundation of the Religious against Trafficking in Women); 
– explanation of the dangers of loverboys, at schools and elsewhere; 
– the explanation that is to be provided by the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employ-

ment to employers and, by means of leaflets, to migrant workers, covering the statu-
tory minimum provisions on employment conditions; 

– a range of actions aimed at identifying potential victims within risk groups as early as 
possible; 

– the covenant between the Ministry of Justice and the Dutch daily press, which in-
cludes the stipulation that daily newspapers request those who place erotic adver-
tisements to state a licence or VAT number in the adverts. This will make it clear to 

                                                                      
1 Prevention is also a significant element in the NAM. 



INTRODUCTION 

 3 

customers whether or not they are dealing with a licensed business, reducing the 
chance that a victim of human trafficking will be encountered in this way.2 One of the 
aims is to increase awareness on the demand side; 

– attention currently being paid in training and education of defence staff to matters 
such as the protection of women and girls against sexual violence, prostitution, abuse 
and indecent assault as well as human trafficking (Taskforce Women, Safety and 
Conflict [‘Vrouwen, Veiligheid en Conflict’] Final Report, 2006); 

– the financing of various projects by the Netherlands (via Dutch embassies) aimed at 
combating human trafficking and supporting victims. 

Because preventive activities are so wide-ranging in nature3 and because so many interven-
tions also incorporate a preventive element – thus, for example, investigation and prosecu-
tion can have a preventive effect – they will be dealt with in the various chapters. Little is 
known about the effectiveness of interventions, and this applies to preventive as well as the 
more ‘curative’ measures; so far there has been little by way of impact evaluation. 

1.4 Dealing with the demand side 

The demand for cheap labour is regarded as an important ‘root cause’ of THB. Rightly, 
therefore, a good deal of attention is paid to addressing the demand side, which can also be 
regarded as a form of (primary) prevention. International documents, such as the Palermo 
Protocol, the Brussels Declaration, the Convention of the Council of Europe, the EU Action 
Plan, the OCSE Action Plan, a resolution by the European Parliament and a resolution by 
the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe,4 all urge states to address the de-
mand side of human trafficking. Discussions on addressing demand, however, are often 
confined to addressing the demand for sexual services – see, for example the report by 
Hughes (2004) on ‘best practices to address the demand side of trafficking’ – and are often of 
an ideological nature. O’Connell Davidson (2006) points out that abolitionist feminist 
groups have lobbied for a very specific approach to the demand side, namely countering 
demand for sexual services in general by criminalising the clients. This is also the conclusion 
of the report by the UN Special Rapporteur on trafficking from February 2006,5 which in fact 
invoked several critical responses, to the effect that the report had not come about in an ob-
jective or sound manner.6 

                                                                      
2 The covenant also sets out that clients will be informed, in between the adverts, that they are likely to be less at 

risk dealing with a licensed company. 
3 This is also evident from the summary of ‘best and promising practices’ from the United Nations, national 

governments and non-governmental organisations in the field of prevention, prepared on the instructions of 
the Canadian National Crime Prevention Centre (Gervais, 2005). 

4 These institutions and documents are discussed in more detail in Chapter 2. 
5 Integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective; Report of the Special Rapporteur on 

trafficking in human beings, especially women and children (E/CN.4/2006/62, dated 20 February 2006). 
6 Thus, in a response in August 2006, La Strada International pointed out that the rapporteur had based her views 

to a significant extent on opinions rather than facts, and wrongly reported that the Palermo Protocol indicates 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 4 

There are, however, various options in relation to dealing with the demand for THB for the 
purpose of exploitation in the sex industry. The choice made by a country depends partly on 
the culture of that country and how prostitution is regarded there. The Swedish govern-
ment, for example, which regards all prostitution as constituting violence against women, 
made the purchase of sexual services a criminal offence. In the Netherlands, where a distinc-
tion is drawn between (commercial) sex by consenting adults and forced prostitution, at-
tempts are made to influence the demand side in other ways, such as via the campaign ‘Ap-
pearances are deceptive’ [‘Schijn bedriegt’], which is aimed at making clients more conscious 
of their responsibilities.  

There is debate in the Netherlands about criminalising the conscious purchase of sexual ser-
vices from individuals who are clearly acting under coercion.7 In a recommendation in the 
third Report, BNRM pressed for discussion on this point, in which not only the desirability 
but also the practical feasibility of any such criminalisation would be considered. Some of 
the chain partners read this recommendation – wrongly – as a plea for criminalisation. It did 
seem (and still seems) of importance to BNRM, partly in light of international pressure, to 
undertake a thorough consideration and a proper debate of a decision for or against. The 
recommendation found its way into the NAM. In its response to the NAM, the Dutch 
Foundation against Trafficking in Women [Stichting Tegen Vrouwenhandel (STV)] asked for 
consideration of the undesirable side-effects of any such measure. ‘It is likely that human 
traffickers, prostitutes and clients will withdraw further into the invisible and often illegal 
circuit in order to avoid arrest. This means that victims will be removed from the purview of 
police, field workers and health care services, with all the risks this entails, and will be de-
prived of assistance and protection. Human traffickers will become more difficult to detect, 
which will hamper the chances of arrests and a repressive approach. Clients will be less in-
clined to report any signs of human trafficking and victimisation if they run the risk of being 
punished", according to the STV. The discussion has not yet been completed. 
There is, however, not only a demand for (cheap) sexual services, but also for cheap labour 
in, for example, construction, agriculture and private households, and there is also a demand 
for human organs. The demand side thus is a multi-faceted concept, and discussions con-
cerning the demand side and measures to discourage it must not be limited to addressing the 
demand for sexual services (see also the statement of the Alliance Expert Coordination 
Team8 concerning the demand side).9 The ILO (2005) argues for the criminalisation of ex-

                                                                      
that all prostitution implies THB. The Global Alliance Against Trafficking in Women (GAATW) concluded, in its 
reaction to the report: ‘While fully acknowledging that the Special Rapporteur is an independent expert […] 
she is at the same time bound by certain principles which govern her mandate; these include strict impartiality 
and objectivity […]. These principles in our view have not been fully respected in this particular exercise. This 
neglect raises questions about the utility of the report.’ 

7 The purchase of sexual services from a minor between the ages of 16 and 18 is already a criminal offence (Art. 
248b, Dutch Criminal Code) as is attending a sex show involving the performance of a minor (Art. 248c Dutch 
Criminal Code). Sex with minors below the age of 16 is also a criminal offence (Art. 244, 245 and 247, Dutch 
Criminal Code). 

8 In which the following are represented, in addition to La Strada: OSCE, various UN divisions, IOM, ICMPD, 



INTRODUCTION 

 5 

ploitation, but also for reducing the risk of exploitation through migration and labour mar-
ket policies. In the Additional Measures to the NAM, the Ministry of Justice together with 
the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment expressed the intention to formulate, in 
2006, initiatives designed to reduce the demand that results – or can result – in labour exploi-
tation, and to collaborate with employers’ associations and trade unions in this effort. One 
initiative taken is the flanking policy designed to restrict any possibly detrimental conse-
quences of the free movement of employees from the EU member states in Central and 
Eastern Europe. 

1.5 Collecting information on human trafficking 

It is widely recognised that knowledge about THB is of major importance for addressing the 
phenomenon in an adequate manner. We need to know more about human traffickers and 
how they work, but also about victims: how do they cope when they are being victimised, 
and in the period following this? If they are brave enough to tell their story, to what extent 
are they offered the necessary assistance and support, and which interventions in the battle 
against human trafficking and in relation to victim support are effective? At the same time, it 
is clear that is very difficult to collect reliable information. There are various reasons for this: 
– exploitation partly occurs in hidden sectors such as the (unlicensed) sex industry, the 

informal economy and behind closed doors in private households, making it difficult 
to detect; 

– victims, including victims of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry, are 
reluctant to tell of their experiences; 

– for these reasons, and also because exploitation does not, generally speaking, cause 
any visible disturbance of public order, cases remain undiscovered. It is unknown 
how large this ‘dark number’ is. 

Another significant question is what type of research is needed. It is often said that studies in 
relation to a single country provide too limited a picture. This is true in relation to specific 
aspects of what is frequently a cross-border offence, such as human trafficking routes or ob-
taining a picture of the situation for victims who have returned to their countries of origin. 
However, for (national) policy purposes, it is valuable and even essential to collect informa-
tion specific to a particular country. This type of information is also indispensable for clari-
fying the meaning of the results from large-scale international comparative studies. All the 
more so, because this type of studies, generally speaking and quite apart from human traf-
ficking, already has to deal with additional problems. 

                                                                      
Europol, Interpol, Nexus Institute, Acta, Anti-Slavery International, ECPAT, Terre des Hommes, Save the 
Children, Amnesty International and BNRM. There is further discussion of the AECT in Chapter 2. 

9 Dated 3 October 2006 (during the special day on trafficking at the Human Dimension Implementation meeting 
of the OSCE). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 6 

An additional problem is that there is no unanimous international definition of THB. While 
the definition of human trafficking in the UN Palermo Protocol on THB is applied broadly 
(see for example Gallagher, 2006), there still are differences between different countries in 
the way they interpret this definition and in how THB is defined in national legislation.10 
This in turn has consequences for any data that may (potentially) be available. In some coun-
tries, the data only covers cross-border human trafficking, whereas others also include in-
ternal (domestic) trafficking. In some countries, the law and the data cover exploitation not 
only in the sex industry but also in other sectors, while in other countries this is not (yet) the 
case. Also, the extent to which combating THB is prioritised in a particular country will in-
fluence the availability and amount of data on the phenomenon. The United States Gov-
ernment Accountability Office (GAO) discusses this type of problems at length and states 
that country-specific information on THB is not available, not reliable or not comparable 
(GAO, 2006).11 
The question arises as to whether studies into THB on a large scale, occasionally even on the 
global scale take adequate account of the distinctions mentioned above. Do they reflect a 
balanced picture of reality, or do they simply reflect figures without paying much attention 
to the context from which these are drawn? It seems that the fact that some countries, such 
as the Netherlands, collect and publish information on THB and trafficking victims12, has a 
negative influence on the image of these countries portrayed in large-scale reports. 
 

UNODC Global Report 
‘The Netherlands in the top 10 destinations for victims of human trafficking’, is apparently one of the 
results of a worldwide investigation by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC, 
2006). The Netherlands is indeed a destination country for victims of THB, which has to be countered 
in every way possible, but there is a question as to whether the problem is so much greater in the Neth-
erlands than in many other Western and non-Western countries. There is not, in fact, any allegation to 
this effect in the UNODC report. 
The overviews in the UNODC report are based on the number of times a particular country is men-
tioned as a country of origin, transit or destination for victims in a range of sources. This means that 
the part played by a country in the report is determined to a significant extent by the amount of atten-
tion paid to THB in that particular country (see also GAO, 2006). The Dutch approach to combating 
human trafficking is certainly susceptible to improvement, but at least attention is paid to the problem. 
This, along with the fact that in the Netherlands information is registered concerning victims, suspects 

                                                                      
10 The UN Protocol allows such scope for countries (see also Otten, 2005; Munro, 2006). 
11 GAO (2006) makes recommendations for increasing the credibility of the global ‘Trafficking in Persons’ (TIP) 

reports produced each year by the American government. The most important of these recommendations is 
that the rationale behind the allocation to ‘tiers’ (categories indicating whether or not a government is doing 
enough to combat human trafficking) must be clear. 

12 And there are not many countries that do so. Vermeulen et al., (2006) conclude on the basis of a ‘state-of-the-
art’ research of the (then) 25 member states of the EU, that only Belgium and the Netherlands, - in the whole of 
Europe - have proper data sets in relation to THB. The authors propose the development of a gigantic interna-
tional database for the collection and analysis of data concerning missing and sexually exploited children as well 
as THB, and have produced a blueprint for this with variables concerning the victim, the event and the perpe-
trator. 



INTRODUCTION 

 7 

and their prosecution, and the fact that there is a National Rapporteur whose reports are referred to in 
many international publications on THB, adds up quickly in overviews such as those of UNODC. 
Many countries voiced fierce criticism of a draft version of the report at the end of 2005. Apart from 
the points mentioned above, BNRM also pointed out the geographical bias (it is, for example, highly 
incredible that not a single African country is classified as ‘very high’ among destination countries) as 
well as problems of methodology, such as the absence of information concerning the validity and reli-
ability of the base material. 
UNODC asked a panel of independent experts to evaluate the research methods and results. The 
panel had comparable objections.13 The most significant conclusion was that the UNODC report ana-
lysed the level of reporting and not the incidence of THB itself. UNODC took the remarks of the panel 
to heart, adopted most of the recommendations from the evaluation, adjusted the terminology to 
some extent and set out the limitations of the research in the report. Unfortunately, but as might have 
been expected, this nuance was missed by the press and is often overlooked when the report is used. 

There is a great need for numbers and a better understanding of them. It should be clear 
from what has already been said that it is difficult to obtain reliable figures on THB, if only 
because of the nature of the phenomenon. Researchers in the area of THB therefore have to 
wrestle with the question whether it is possible to estimate the size of, for example, popula-
tions of the victims of THB. The results have not hitherto been encouraging. In the United 
States, the GAO, for example, confirms that the US government, which publishes the global 
‘Trafficking in Persons’ (TIP) report each year, has still not developed any effective mecha-
nism for assessing numbers of victims (GAO, 2006). The study by Sikkel et al. (2006) into 
methods for assessing the size of hidden populations in the Netherlands, particularly un-
documented migrants, does not give much cause for hope either. This is regrettable, but we 
should also appreciate that, although knowing the numbers might say something about the 
scale of the measures needed to be able to deal with THB, this would not clarify what has to 
be done. For this, we (also) need more in the way of qualitative information. In this respect it 
is regrettable that, while many countries are showing interest in the phenomenon of the 
‘NRM’ and international bodies are urging the appointment of rapporteurs,14 very few na-
tional rapporteurs have yet been appointed. Not much has changed on this point since the 
third Report.15  
 

                                                                      
13 Report of Meeting of Experts on UNODC Report on Trafficking in Human Beings, Vienna, 24-25 January 

2006. 
14 Thus the General Assembly of United Nations recommended the appointment of national rapporteurs (in 

Resolution A/RES/59/166, dated 10 February 2005), as did the European Commission (EC) (in the Communi-
cation Fighting trafficking in human beings– an integrated approach and proposals for an action plan (Notice 
COM(2005) 514 dated 18 October 2005) and the European Parliament (in the Resolution Strategies to prevent 
the trafficking of women and children who are vulnerable to sexual exploitation (A6-0400/2005 dated 14 December 
2005). A UK country report by Anti-Slavery International states that ‘An independent National Rapporteur on 
Trafficking in Human Beings should be established in the UK, along the lines of the role of the Dutch National 
Rapporteur’ (Anti-Slavery International, 2006). 

15 It can be stated, however, that Romania is working on the establishment of a National Agency Against Trafficking 
in Persons, which will also have reporting duties. An increasing number of countries has a taskforce, national 
coordinator and/or national action plan on THB. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 8 

Working methods of BNRM 
BNRM collects both quantitative and qualitative information. This is done using among other meth-
ods: 
- in-house research; 
- secondary analysis of existing data files; 
- the organisation of meetings; 
- attendance at consultative structures; 
- participation in advisory committees; 
- participation in working groups; 
- attending conferences and workshops both in the Netherlands and abroad; 
- occasional attendance at meetings, and also being kept up-to-date by means of minutes of such meet-

ings, held by local (support) networks on THB; 
- many bilateral contacts (in person, by telephone or email) with a wide range of individuals and bodies. 

1.6 This report 

Where possible, each chapter follows a similar pattern: policy-oriented information is dealt 
with first, followed by the figures, then any international developments, and lastly relevant 
points of interest and bottlenecks. 
A lot has happened in relation to combating THB in the Netherlands since the publication of 
the third Report, the last report which contained an extensive description of the develop-
ments in this area. Still, many points remain on which progress can and should be made. 
These are dealt with in Chapter 10 in the form of recommendations. These recommenda-
tions cover a wide range of issues, including legislation and regulations, victims of THB, as-
sistance and the protection of interests, law enforcement, police and investigation, and the 
PPS and prosecution. 
 



 9 

2 
 Legislation and Regulations 

2.1 Introduction 

A number of changes have been introduced into legislation and regulations in the field of 
trafficking in human beings (THB) since the previous reports were issued. The principal 
amendment to Dutch legislation was the finalisation and entering into force of the new THB 
provision in the Dutch Criminal Code [Wetboek van Strafrecht].  

2.2 National legislation and regulations 

2.2.1 The new THB provision 

Procedural 
The previous THB Article 250a Dutch Criminal Code was replaced by a new and extended 
Article 273a on 1 January 2005.1 The purpose of this new Article was to implement UN2 and 
EU3 legislation, in anticipation of the (proposed) ratification and implementation of these 
documents in Dutch legislation. 
On 1 September 2006, Article 273a Criminal Code was renumbered, without any substan-
tive alteration to the text, to Article 273f.  
 

Ratification of UN instruments 
The Netherlands ratified the UN Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (New York, 15 
November 2000, hereafter ‘the UN Convention’) on 26 May 2004. Ratification of the Protocol to Pre-
vent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children, annex to the UN 

                                                                      
1  State Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 2004, 690. 
2 The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, on the Sale of Children, Child 

Prostitution and Child Pornography, signed on 25 May 2000 in New York (Treaties Series 2001, 63); the 
Convention against Transnational Organised Crime, signed in New York on 15 November 2000 (Treaty Series 
2001, 68); the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress, and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and 
Children, Supplementing the Convention against Transnational Organised Crime, signed in New York on 15 
November 2000 (T.S. 2001, 69); and the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, 
Supplementing the Convention against Transnational Organised Crime, signed in New York on 15 November 
2000 (T.S. 2001, 70). 

3 The Framework Decision by the Council on combating trafficking in human beings, Brussels, 19 July 2002 
(Official Journal of the EU 2002, L 203); the Council Directive defining the facilitation of unauthorised entry, 
transit and residence, Brussels, 28 November 2002 (OJ 2002, L 328); the Framework Decision by the Council on 
the strengthening of the penal framework to prevent the facilitation of unauthorised entry, transit and 
residence, Brussels, 28 November 2002 (OJ 2002, L 328); and the Framework Decision by the Council on combating 
the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography, Brussels, 22 December 2003 (OJ 2004, L 13). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 10 

Convention (New York, 15 November 2000, hereafter ‘the Palermo Protocol’) followed on 27 July 
2005.4 The Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, on the Sale of Children, 
Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, (New York, 25 May 2000) was ratified by the Netherlands 
on 23 August 2005). 

31 July 2004, which was the final date for implementation of the EU Council’s Framework 
Decision on combating trafficking in human beings (hereafter ‘the Framework Decision on 
THB’), was not achieved since Article 273a Criminal Code entered into force on 1 January 
2005.5 The Council Framework Decision on combating the sexual exploitation of children 
and child pornography was implemented in time (final date 20 January 2006). 

The new THB provision entails a significant extension of the conduct criminalised as THB: 
in addition to sexual exploitation, other forms of exploitation in the area of employment and 
services, as well as forced or induced removal of organs. Forcing or inducing another person 
to surrender the proceeds from sex work or from organ removal has also been criminal-
ised.6 The classification of THB was (again) introduced to cover all of these types of conduct. 
 

What is not covered by the THB provision? 
The legislator has indicated a number of activities that it does not classify as THB.  
The first of these is illegal adoption,7 which happens when a child is adopted, or offered for adoption, 
outside official channels (for example without the permission of the parents and/or the competent au-
thorities in the country of origin). The rules on international adoption are included in the Act on the 
Placement in the Netherlands of Foreign Children with a View to Adoption [Wet opneming 
buitenlandse kinderen ter adoptie.]8 This Act criminalises any adoption that is not in accordance with the 
current rules and procedures. It only constitutes THB if a child is adopted with the intent of exploiting 
that child.  
The sale and purchase of children – in isolation and therefore not associated with adoption – which has 
to be rendered a criminal offence on the basis of the Convention of the Rights of the Child and its annex, 
the Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography, is only punishable 
as THB if there is exploitation, or an intention to exploit. It is not, in fact, clear whether and if so where 
the sale and purchase of children in other situations is rendered punishable. The case of the Somali 
children who were brought to the Netherlands and who, after some years, were returned to (and 

                                                                      
4 On the same date, the Netherlands also ratified the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea 

and Air, Supplementing the Convention against Transnational Organised Crime, Treaties Series 2001, 70. 
5 The same applies to implementation of the Council’s Framework Decision on the strengthening of the penal 

framework to prevent the facilitation of unauthorised entry, transit and residence, and for fulfilling the Council 
Directive defining the facilitation of unauthorised entry, transit and residence, both of which documents should 
have been implemented by 4 December 2004.  

6 Forcing or inducing the surrender of income from other forms of work or services was not included in the 
relevant sub-section (9).  

7 According to the Minister of Justice in the Additional Measures for the National Action Plan on THB 
[Nationaal Actieplan Mensenhandel (Parliamentary Papers II 2005/06, 28 638, no. 19)]. 

8 The Dutch Criminal Code also contains a number of penal provisions where specific activities in relation to 
giving up children are rendered criminal: Articles 151a, b and c and Art. 253, as well as - less directly - Articles 236, 
279 and 442a, Dutch Criminal Code. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 11 

abandoned in) Somalia does not fall within the definition of THB either. According to the Cabinet9 it 
is even questionable whether it could be classified as THB if the children were brought to the Nether-
lands under false pretences and in an illegal manner, to live here with someone who wanted to earn 
money from their residence here by giving them less money than the amount of child benefit, because 
it is not clear whether such cases would involve the element of exploitation required for THB. If the 
children go to school and if they are fed and clothed, the Cabinet considers that the aspect of exploita-
tion is not immediately clear. However, it does state in the letter that, for example, if (heavy) household 
work was to be combined with a failure to attend school, this might amount to exploitation. Such prac-
tices might well fall under the criminal provisions in relation to fraud, people smuggling, et cetera. The 
principal reason why these activities are not classified as THB is the fact that there is, in principle, no 
exploitation (or intention to exploit) as regards work or services.  
While a forced marriage may not necessarily be concluded with a view to exploitation, it is described as 
a practice akin to slavery, provided that there is payment of a consideration in money or in kind; in the 
Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and Institutions and Practices Similar 
to Slavery;10 this is one of the forms of exploitation specified in Article 273f, paragraph 2. Schmidt and  
Rijken (2005), however, argue that this might be better to prosecute under the general provision on 
coercion (Art. 284, Dutch Criminal Code) or as abuse, rather than as THB.11 This would in any event 
appear to be more appropriate if there is no exploitation (or intention to exploit). 

In addition to an extension of the scope of the THB Article, a number of new aggravating 
circumstances were added, with appropriate penalties. The existing aggravating circum-
stances, namely ‘committed in association, ‘committed in relation to a victim below the age 
of 16’ or a combination of the two,12 continue to be enforced with the same maximum pen-
alty, but now apply to all forms of exploitation. The aggravating circumstance of ‘resulting in 
serious bodily harm’ no longer applies as an element to be combined with one of the previ-
ously mentioned aggravating circumstances,13 but is added as a separate element with a sub-
stantially higher maximum penalty of 12 years.14 This sentence also applies to the newly 
added aggravating circumstance of ‘threatening the life of another person’.15 Another aggra-
vating circumstance that has been added is ‘resulting in death’, with a possible maximum of 
15 years’ imprisonment.16 
 

Sentences for non-aggravated THB 
The legislative amendment left the penalty for THB without aggravating circumstances at a maximum 
of 6 years. The Minister of Justice indicated that the gravity and seriousness of the offence were re-
flected in the proposed maximum penalties, which the government considered were quite proportion-

                                                                      
9 In their letter to the Lower House (Parliamentary Papers II 2005/06, 28 638, no. 22). 
10 7 September 1956, 266 UNTS 3. 
11 The differences in maximum penalties are of significant importance, for example a maximum of nine months 

imprisonment or a monetary fine in category three for coercion. Moreover, coercion by threats of slander or 
libel is an offence prosecutable only in case of complaint. 

12 Art. 250a (2)(1), (2)(2) and (3) Criminal Code (old), now Art. 273f (3) and (4) Criminal Code. 
13 Art. 250a (2)(3) (old). 
14 Art. 273f (5) Criminal Code. 
15 Art. 273f (5) Criminal Code. 
16 Art. 273f (6) Criminal Code. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 12 

ate to the nature and gravity of the offence. But we should establish that the sentence for the basic of-
fence of THB could be described as light when compared with offences of a similar nature. The level of 
the maximum penalty also has consequences for the possibility of pre-trial detention.17 

The content of Article 250a Criminal Code (old) was transferred (albeit not literally) into 
Article 273f Criminal Code. The legislator intended to avoid introducing any amendment to 
what was already a punishable offence under Article 250a Criminal Code (old) so that the 
detailed interpretation of that offence in terms of case law would also retain its significance 
under the new provision. Article 273f Criminal Code became a very extensive and complex 
provision, because it incorporated, in a single provision on THB, so many courses of con-
duct of disparate natures. The distinctions between various types of work, and the fact that 
other elements of crime constitute THB when individuals below the age of 18 fall victim, re-
sulted in a large number of sub-paragraphs to describe all of the courses of conduct being 
criminalised. The result is the longest article in the Criminal Code, and not the easiest to un-
derstand. This is partly due to the use of a number of expressions which are not explained in 
greater detail. These expressions are drawn from the international documents underlying 
the new THB provision. In order to interpret Article 273f Criminal Code, one therefore re-
quires not only the Explanatory Memorandum, but also the underlying international legisla-
tion, which classifies THB as a (serious) form of organised crime and violation of human 
rights. 

At its core, Article 273f Criminal Code contemplates the criminalisation of excessive abuse of 
individuals in an employment or service provision relationship, along with all conduct 
amounting to putting anyone into such a position.18 The offence of THB also encompasses 
profiting from such circumstances and forcing someone to surrender income from sex work 
and from the removal of organs. The Article does not cover all wrongs in an employment or 
service provision relationship; insofar as there is no excessive abuse, the matter will have to 
be dealt with by means other than the THB provision. When assessing whether or not there 
has been excessive abuse, the determining factors are the circumstances in which the victim 
finds himself or herself, and under which he or she is put to work. The nature of the forced 
work is also relevant. In light of international legislation, it is important whether the funda-
mental human rights of the victim have been violated (or are under threat of violation) by 
the conduct in question. If that is the case, then there is excessive abuse which can be classi-
fied as exploitation within the meaning of THB. 
 

                                                                      
17 Art. 67a (2)(1) Code of Criminal Procedure: if there is a suspicion of an offence where the statutory description 

applies a prison sentence of twelve years or more and public order is seriously compromised by the offence. 
18 In addition to exploitation, Art. 273f Criminal Code, makes separate mention of the removal of organs in 

certain circumstances.  



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 13 

The key term ‘exploitation'19 
Exploitation is the central expression within the offence of THB.20 In fact, according to the Explana-
tory Memorandum, ‘THB is (aimed at) exploitation’.21  
Within the meaning of the THB Article, exploitation must be linked with a situation of labour or ser-
vices. There must also be an excess (i.e. a breach of fundamental human rights). Article 273f (2) Crimi-
nal Code provides a non-exhaustive list of what exploitation in this sense comprises: exploitation of 
someone else in prostitution, other forms of sexual exploitation, forced or compulsory work or ser-
vices, slavery and practices similar to slavery or servitude. This enumeration of situations which the 
legislator regards as exploitation does not, however, provide any clearly delimited criterion. A more 
detailed definition is therefore required. As regards the sex industry, the legislator and the Dutch Su-
preme Court recognise a circumstance as a case of exploitation if the party concerned ends up in a 
situation that is not equivalent to the situation in which an articulate prostitute tends to find herself in 
the Netherlands.22 The nature of the work to be done is of major importance in this interpretation as it 
was formulated well before the abolition of the general ban on brothels. This is precisely why, in other 
sectors, not every situation worse than that likely to be encountered by an articulate worker will 
amount to exploitation. The nature of forced work in the sex industry means that exploitation comes 
about readily, since physical integrity is at stake by definition. The same applies to forced organ re-
moval. As far as exploitation in other sectors is concerned, it seems that the situation likely to be en-
countered by an articulate worker can be used as a point of reference, but a more serious criterion 
seems appropriate. In these cases, the issue of whether or not there is exploitation is to be determined 
principally by the gravity of the sub-standard conditions, the course leading there and the impact on 
the fundamental human rights of those involved.  
The precise threshold for non-sexual exploitation is still vague. It is impossible to provide a simple de-
scription of an excess in an employment or service context, as this needs to be assessed on a case-by-
case basis, but one of the defining factors in any event will be the (inherent) violation of fundamental 
human rights. To describe a situation as excessive, there has to be at least one obvious excess or an ac-
cumulation of lesser wrongs.23 Factors such as gravity, duration, scope and the economic benefit ob-
tained also play a part here. The single or cumulative excess should, in principle, be considered objec-
tively; according to the current standards of Dutch society and the Dutch legal system. Fundamental 
human rights again play a central part here. To be classified as exploitation, the determining factor is 
not therefore whether the victim regards himself or herself as having been exploited; though the vic-
tim’s subjective experience may play a part in assessing whether he or she could have escaped from the 
exploitative situation. 

                                                                      
19 See also Korvinus et al., (2006). 
20 The central expression in the Belgian and French criminalisation of THB is (putting someone to work in 

circumstances incompatible with) human dignity. There is also debate on this concept (Bontinck, 2006). 
21 Parliamentary Papers II 2002/03, 29 291, no. 3. 
22 E.g., Supreme Court, 5 February 2002, where there was a reference to the Explanatory Memorandum 

accompanying the introduction of Art. 250ter Criminal Code. In relation to the sex industry, the legislator and 
the Supreme Court identify a situation of exploitation when the person involved is in a situation inferior to the 
circumstances in which an articulate prostitute would normally operate in the Netherlands. 

23 This might, for example, involve underpayment, irregular payment, long working hours, being forced to work 
under a different identity, confiscation of a passport, or threats of dismissal if the person fails to do what he/she 
is told to do. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 14 

Trafficking in human beings as defined in Article 273f Criminal Code occurs if the exploita-
tion (or the intent to exploit) is accompanied by the application of some element of coer-
cion.24 Coercion is not, however, a precondition for the existence of an exploitative situa-
tion. This follows from the fact that no coercion is required with respect to the definition of 
trafficking in minors, while (the intent for) exploitation is required. 
Exploitation nonetheless implies a certain degree of involuntariness on the part of those be-
ing exploited. The involuntary nature of the exploitative situation lurks in the impossibility 
of getting out of it.25 This is impossible in cases where measures are used which directly re-
strict physical freedom (for example being locked up or watched). If the victim is controlled 
by his or her exploiter(s) by means other than physical restraint, escape might be possible in 
practical terms, but the victim's subjective assessment of the situation may impede him or 
her from escaping. The facts and circumstances should then confirm that it was reasonable 
for the victim to assume that he or she could not escape from the situation by his or her own 
efforts, for example because of the (perceived) consequences for the victim of escaping. A 
lack of freedom then can also result from a relationship of debt with the employer or a third 
party, the cultural context, being a child or a combination of these factors. It is important in 
such an assessment to consider all facets of the situation and how these interrelate. 

Exploitation in the sense of THB thus involves serious abuses, with the victim's fundamental 
human rights being violated and where his or her freedom is restricted – or he or she rea-
sonably feels this to be the case – to such an extent that there is no escape from the situation. 
Exploitation is the key term in Article 273f Criminal Code. It is the final aim of the actions 
criminalised in Article 273f (1)(1) and (1)(2).26 The legislator clearly left the more detailed 
definition of the limits of exploitation outside the sex industry to the courts. At the time of 
writing, BNRM is aware of three court verdicts at first instance in relation to this type of ex-
ploitation.27 This means that there is not yet much clarification on which abuses in relation 
to labour and services qualify as exploitation in the sense of THB. 
 

Application of Article 251 Criminal Code 
Article 273f Criminal Code specifies that Article 251 Criminal Code is to apply mutatis mutandis. Article 
251 allows the courts to deprive individuals of certain rights and to stop them from exercising certain 

                                                                      
24 Elements of coercion are understood to include those summarised at Art. 273f (1)(1) Dutch Criminal Code: 

coercion, violence or some other circumstance, or threats of violence or other circumstances, extortion, fraud, 
deception or misuse of an imbalance of power arising from the actual situation, misuse of a vulnerable position, 
or the giving or receiving of payment or benefits to obtain the agreement of someone who exercises control 
over someone else. 

25 There is also the use of an element of coercion to get the individual into the exploitative situation. The same 
element of coercion may also ensure that the person is hindered from getting out of the situation. 

26 The coerced removal of organs, which also qualifies as THB, is not described as exploitation, but as a separate 
final aim of the actions described in the Article. 

27 These cases involved the illegal employment of Bulgarians as hemp pickers, Chinese in a restaurant, and 
cleaners. In all cases, the accused were exonerated at first instance on the THB charges (see LJN AZ2707, LJN 
BA0145 and LJN BB5303). 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 15 

professions, in case of conviction for specific offences, including the right to hold certain offices or to 
serve in the armed forces.  

2.2.2 Amendments to the B-9 regulation 

The B-9 regulation (Chapter B-9 of the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines) allows for-
eign nationals who are (or might be) victims of or witnesses to THB to reside legally in the 
Netherlands on a temporary basis during the investigation and prosecution, so as to be 
available to the police and the Public Prosecution Service (PPS). The police ought to inform 
any foreign national who might be a victim of THB, when there is a slight indication of THB, 
of the rights described in the B-9 regulation, and offer him or her a period for reflection. The 
reflection period gives victims time to decide whether or not they want to report the crimi-
nal offence. For a period of maximum three months the expulsion of the victim from the 
Netherlands is suspended. 

The B-9 regulation has undergone a range of amendments since the new THB provision 
came into effect. 
– The regulation has been made compatible with Article 273f Criminal Code, largely with 

retrospective effect to 1 January 200528, so that it also applies to victims and witnesses who 
have reported the crime (reporting witnesses) of exploitation in other sectors than the sex 
industry. Unlike victims of sexual exploitation, however, they were not offered any period 
for reflection. This amendment also introduced the possibility for victims and reporting 
witnesses of all forms of THB to work from the time when they receive a residence per-
mit, but not before that during the reflection period. The possibility for working came into 
operation on 13 April 2005. A section on family reunification was also added, making it 
possible for underage children of victims and reporting witnesses to obtain a residence 
permit with the same duration as that of the principal applicant. The requirement of suffi-
cient means does not apply in such cases.29  

– With effect from 1 July 2005, victims of THB and others were exempted from the fees for 
applications for provisional residence permits (authorisation for temporary stay) and 
regular residence permits. This exemption also extends to their underage children coming 
to the Netherlands in the context of family reunification.30 

– In November 2005, the opportunity to have a reflection period was extended to victims of 
all forms of exploitation.31 The regulation was also extended to a number of categories 
which had not previously been (fully) entitled to its benefits:  

                                                                      
28 Dutch Government Gazette 2005, 53. 
29 This requirement implies that a residence permit will only be granted if the principal applicant has sufficient 

independent and permanent means of existence. 
30 Dutch Government Gazette 2005, 124. 
31 Dutch Government Gazette 2005, 220. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 16 

– the reflection period was opened up to foreign nationals already in the Netherlands who 
might have been victims of THB outside the Netherlands but have not yet been exploited 
in the Netherlands;32 

– foreign nationals who did not yet have access to the Netherlands, but who might be vic-
tims of THB, were afforded the opportunity of reporting the crime. They are not, how-
ever, entitled to the reflection period either; and 

– reporting witnesses of all forms of THB were entitled to rights under the B-9 regulation.33 
– The criteria for continued residence after expiry of a residence permit on the basis of the 

B-9 regulation were amended with effect from 14 August 2006.34 If information on THB 
provided by a victim ultimately results in conviction of the suspect in relation to that THB, 
the Minister will henceforth assume that this implies, in law, that returning the victim to 
his or her country of origin involves risks. If the victim makes an application for continued 
residence in these circumstances, it can35 be approved on these grounds. If the prosecution 
does not lead to a conviction but three years have passed since the B-9 residence permit 
was awarded and no further appeal is possible against the verdict, then the most signifi-
cant humanitarian factor to be considered by the Minister will be the length of the victim's 
residence. These amendments only apply to victims of THB who have reported the of-
fence and have submitted an application for continued residence. The regulation does not 
apply to reporting witnesses. Applications for continued residence by victims and wit-
nesses, to which these criteria do not apply, will be dealt with in accordance with the pre-
existing criteria in the B-9 regulation.36  

 
Comments on the amendments mentioned above 
The amendments are certainly a step forward, but also merit some comment. Thus the former policy 
applies when a criminal case is dismissed by the PPS, but there is something to be said for applying the 
new and more generous policy in such cases. This will, of course, depend on the basis of the dismissal, 
as dismissals based on ‘suspect deceased’ or ‘suspect untraceable’ deserve different consideration than 
dismissals for ‘no valid proof’ or ‘wrongly reported as a suspect’. 
Another point is that Article 273f Criminal Code has a broad scope, which encompasses cases with 
varying degrees of gravity. The amended B-9 regulation makes no provision for this point. In more 
practical terms, a foreign national who wishes to rely on one of the added categories must personally 

                                                                      
32 The previous position was that this only applied to prostitution, and also the reflection period did not apply to 

this category of foreign nationals. 
33 And not, as previously, just (reporting) witnesses of THB for the purpose of sexual exploitation. 
34  Letter dated 14 August 2006 (Parliamentary Papers II 2005/06, 28 638, no. 26), resulting in an Amendment to 

the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines [Vreemdelingencirculaire] (2006/36A) dated 8 November 2006 (State 
Bulletin of Acts and Decrees. 2006, 225). 

35 The Minister here uses an elective term. 
36 These are the following factors, which play a significant part in connection with the application: 1. the risk of 

reprisals against the party concerned or his/her family and the extent of protection against these reprisals that 
the authorities in the country of origin are willing and able to be provide; 2. risk of prosecution in the country of 
origin, for example for prostitution; and 3. the possibilities for social reintegration in the country of origin, 
bearing in mind the specific cultural background and history of the party concerned in prostitution, permanent 
disruption of family relationships, social attitudes to prostitution and the relevant government policy. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 17 

lodge a copy of the court verdict as evidence. The problem, however, is that the victim is not a party to 
the proceedings and will not therefore (automatically) have a copy of the verdict, and may not even be 
aware of it. This particular issue might in any event be partially ameliorated by ensuring that the victim 
is always assisted by a specialist legal adviser. 
The regulation also only mentions victims, and not witnesses or reporting witnesses. A witness coop-
erating with investigation and prosecution can also run the risk of reprisals if his or her co-operation 
contributes towards a conviction of the trafficker. In this respect, the premise applicable to victims 
would also seem to be appropriate for witnesses. 
If the criminal case does not result in a prosecution, then there is a condition that the victim must have 
resided in the Netherlands on the basis of a B-9 permit for three years at the date of the verdict. The 
Minister will then ‘regard the duration of the victim's residence as the most important humanitarian 
factor’. If this ground depends on the fact that the victim has been contributing to the investigation and 
prosecution for three years or more, the condition that there must have been a verdict in the criminal 
case is hard to understand. As the regulation is currently formulated, it would be possible for a victim 
to spend more than three years facing uncertainty about his or her (continued) residence, while coop-
erating in a lengthy criminal case. 

The amendments to the B-9 regulation that have been implemented and announced are to a 
significant extent connected with shortcomings in the regulation previously established, and 
also with the wish to introduce improvements and flexibility. Not all of the shortcomings 
stem from the regulation itself, though: they are often connected with an incorrect applica-
tion of the regulation in practice. 

One proposed amendment relates to a category of victims who cooperate in investigation 
and prosecution in some way other than reporting the offence, if the PPS considers their 
residence to be necessary. When this Chapter was being written, the details of this proposal 
had not yet been elaborated.  
The distinction between reporting a crime and a statement is primarily of relevance in the 
context of criminal legislation. In order to circumvent the somewhat artificial distinction in 
the context of migration law, it is recommended that a provision should be included in the 
B-9 regulation to the effect that a statement from a witness will be the equivalent of a report 
of a crime for the purposes of applying the regulation.  

2.2.3 Aliens Employment Act 

The Minister of Social Affairs and Employment stated back in 2000, in response to Parlia-
mentary questions, that the general prohibition on issuing employment permits for prosti-
tutes from outside the EU, as formulated in the Implementation Order for the Aliens Em-
ployment Act [Wet arbeid vreemdelingen (WAV)] would be abolished in the foreseeable fu-
ture.NRM1 This has not yet happened, however. 
 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 18 

Tax Administration, the prostitution sector and the Aliens Employment Act 
Ever since the general ban on brothels was abolished, there has been a difference of understanding be-
tween operators, prostitutes and the Tax Administration (TA) about how to consider prostitution 
work in sex businesses from the technical tax perspective. The operators would ideally want to be re-
garded as offering facilities rather than as employers, and the women would prefer to be independent 
entrepreneurs. Based on the factual circumstances, however, the TA has held time and time again that 
the operator/prostitute relationship is to be classified as an employer/employee one, with the result 
that the operator has to withhold national insurance contributions and income tax, and that social se-
curity legislation is also applicable. Operators object to this and are always trying to introduce changes 
to prevent the TA from finding any relationship of authority. This has resulted in many legal proceed-
ings.37  

An amendment to the Implementation Order for the Aliens Employment Act provides for 
the possibility that has already been mentioned for victims of THB to earn income from 
work during their temporary residence under the B-9 regulation. It is therefore possible for 
these foreign nationals to work starting from the time at which this temporary residence 
permit is issued. What is notable here is that a victim or witness may also work in prostitu-
tion, even if she is not allowed to do so as an independent entrepreneur or an employee 
without a permit under the B-9 regulation.  

2.2.4 Other (imminent) legislation and regulations 

Prevention of Marriages of Convenience Act 
The Prevention of Marriages of Convenience Act [Wet voorkoming schijnhuwelijken] came 
into effect on 1 November 1994, with the aim of checking – either before the marriage was 
concluded or before a marriage concluded abroad was registered in the (Dutch) Municipal 
Administration – on whether the marriage was not being entered into purely with a view to 
acquiring residence rights in the Netherlands. In response to Parliamentary questions, the 
Minister indicated that, while he felt it possible that foreign nationals from outside the EU 
might apply for a residence permit to stay with a (marriage) partner so as to obtain access to 
prostitution work, the standard checks on marriages of convenience would apply to such 
situations. In order to identify victims of THB, the police use a list of indicators to help with 
identifying victims who also have residence entitlements. A marriage of convenience would 
therefore not, according to the Minister, obstruct identification as a victim of THB. Even 
when a victim of THB obtains a residence permit in the Netherlands through marriage, fol-
lowing residence based on the B-9 regulation, the checks on the prostitution sector and the 
THB legislation offer sufficient facilities, according to the Minister, for identifying any vic-
tims or perpetrators of THB, so that there is no need for any extra measures to allow for applica-
tion of the Prevention of Marriages of Convenience Act in relation to the fight against THB. 

                                                                      
37 Where the TA is often held to be correct. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 19 

Review of Maximum Penalties Act  
The Review of Maximum Penalties Act [Wet herijking strafmaxima] came into effect on 1 
February 2006.38 The Act includes adjustment of the categories of monetary fines, increas-
ing the monetary fine in category five – which can be imposed for THB – from €45,000 to 
€67,000. 

Bill to Strengthen the Position of the Victim in Criminal Proceedings 
In a letter of 20 March 200239 the government of the Netherlands informed the Council of 
the EU about the adoption into its national law of the obligations in the Framework Deci-
sion on the status of the victim in criminal proceedings (hereafter the ‘EU Framework Deci-
sion on Victim Care’).40 In this letter, the government informed the Council: ‘Generally 
speaking, we can say that the Netherlands has implemented all provisions of the said 
Framework Decision.’ In the National Action Plan on THB [Nationaal Actieplan Mensenhan-
del (NAM)], the government also indicated, when responding to a recommendation from 
the NRM,41 that ‘The EU Framework Decision on the status of victims in criminal proceed-
ings has not resulted in any amendment of Dutch legislation or regulations. There was no 
need for this, because a high level of victim care is already offered in the Netherlands.’ 
The aim of the proposed Bill to Strengthen the Position of Victims in Criminal Proceedings 
is to provide clarity for victims of a crime on their rights and possible role during the prior 
investigation and at trial, based on the principle that a victim’s position in criminal proceed-
ings should be more clearly described than is currently the case under the Dutch Code of 
Criminal Procedure. The Bill defines the victim's rights in the criminal proceedings in terms 
of how he or she is treated, information, compensation and the right to speak at the hearing. 
It should be pointed out that the victim’s interest needs to be balanced against the justified – 
but possibly contrary – interests of other parties to the proceedings, such as the accused. 
Only a victim who ‘has suffered a proprietary loss or other disadvantage as a direct conse-
quence of the crime’ can rely on the provisions. This general scheme for victims is relevant 
to victims of THB, because these rights are not conditioned on any cooperation in the inves-
tigation and prosecution phases. The victim must, of course, be known to the judicial sys-
tem. The Explanatory Memorandum indicates: ‘Anyone who reports to the police as a vic-
tim is in principle entitled to be treated correctly. There may, however, be a limited number 
of cases where a false statement or false report is made. But this is no reason for assuming 
that a victim is not acting in good faith (…).’ The Explanatory Memorandum continues that 
‘victims remain victims until the contrary is established’ and ‘the degree of police and Minis-
try of Justice involvement will depend in the first instance on the gravity of the offence. The 
more serious the offence, the greater the effort that can be expected from the judicial system, 
certainly if the case involves a serious infringement of the victim’s physical integrity. These 
                                                                      
38 Act of 22 December 2005, State Bulletin of Acts and Decrees, 2006, no. 11. 
39 Letter on the Evaluation of the Framework Decision on Victim Care, from the Minister of Justice to the 

Secretary-General of the Council of the EU. 
40 Framework Decision of 15 March 2001, OJ 2001, L 082. 
41 NRM3, recommendation 5. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 20 

cases require extra care on the part of the police and the Ministry of Justice, whether or not 
the crime is subsequently solved.’ Because the nature of the offence of THB involves, by 
definition, a violation of fundamental human rights – one of these being the right to physical 
integrity – this increased effort on the part of the police and the Ministry of Justice will al-
ways apply to victims of THB. 

Secure Juvenile Care Bill [Wetsvoorstel gesloten jeugdzorg] 
The Lower House has been dealing with the Secure Juvenile Care Bill since the summer of 
2006.42 The Bill’s aim is to create a facility for compulsory reception, secure residence and 
the application of measures such as mandatory treatment for juveniles with serious behav-
ioural problems, within the framework of the Juvenile Care Act [Wet op de jeugdzorg]. This is 
only possible within the current statutory system if the minor is placed in a judicial juvenile 
institution under civil law proceedings. As far as THB is concerned, the existing system re-
sults in (minor) victims (such as loverboy victims) sometimes being placed in the same insti-
tution as the perpetrators. At the moment placement (compulsory or otherwise) in a judicial 
juvenile institution is also only possible for those below the age of majority; the possibility of 
mandatory assistance comes to an end as soon as the juvenile reaches the age of majority. In 
practice, the result is that 16- and 17-year-old juveniles – an age category which is a preferred 
focus for loverboysNRM3 – are no longer being taken into reception compulsorily because the 
assistance will have little impact in the available remaining time. The Bill also contemplates a 
widening of the circle – to include juveniles up to the age of 21 – of individuals who will be 
covered by the amended Juvenile Care Act. The condition will be that there is already a court 
order in place on the date they reach the age of majority. 
Orders from the courts will be required for reception and residence in a mandatory setting, 
according to the Bill. Juveniles up to the age of 21, with serious (family) problems, will poten-
tially be subject to such an order. There must also be a need for reception into a secure set-
ting, so as to prevent the youngster from evading the requisite care or from being withdrawn 
from such care by others. Examples quoted in the Explanatory Memorandum in this con-
text include girls ending up facing problems under the influence of a loverboy. Loverboys 
often wait until the girl in question has reached the age of 18, thus falling outside the scope of 
the statutory facilities for mandatory assistance. The proposal to extend the scope of appli-
cation of the Juvenile Care Act to 21-year-olds will offer greater elbowroom here, provided 
that the juvenile care has been embarked upon before they turn 18. 
The Bill as it proposed would also allow for the placement of victims of loverboys outside 
judicial juvenile institutions, so that they would no longer be locked up in institutions where 
the perpetrators of this type of activity might also be sent. 

                                                                      
42 Parliamentary Papers II 2005/6, 30 644, no. 2. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 21 

Memorandum on Illegal Aliens 
The Minister for Immigration and Integration submitted the Memorandum on Illegal 
Aliens [Illegalennota] to the Lower House on 23 April 2004.43 This document presented 
measures to address the problem of foreign nationals residing illegally in the Netherlands. 
On the one hand, these measures are intended to combat illegal residence in the Netherlands 
more forcefully, while on the other hand they are designed to address abuse of the vulnerable 
position in which such illegals44 may find themselves. Human trafficking is a topic in the 
document because exploiters are prominent where illegal residence is involved. In addition 
to fighting these profiteers, one of the underlying principles in the battle against illegal resi-
dence is that illegals are entitled to be treated humanely. 
The Memo states that if THB is opposed effectively, it will make a significant contribution to 
the battle against illegal residence. ‘After all, the parasitical (infra)structures behind illegal 
immigration will also be impacted by the fight against THB under criminal law.’ It goes on to 
present a number of concrete measures to counteract THB. These fall within the areas of ac-
cess for the police to systems in the immigration process, investment in information-led in-
vestigation of THB, recognition of signs of THB in the context of the supervision of foreign 
nationals and the standard inclusion in campaign plans – in the context of the supervision of 
foreign nationals – that the police will offer possible victims of THB an opportunity to re-
port the crime. 
In the written consultation between the Minister and the Lower House Standing Justice 
Committee,45 the Minister indicated that ‘the first interest to be served in THB cases is that 
of the victim.’ 

Minimum Wage and Minimum Holiday Allowance Act 
The Lower House has repeatedly indicated that the introduction of the free movement of 
workers from the new member states in the EU46 can only count on support from the 
House once a flanking policy in connection with the enforcement of employment condi-
tions has been introduced. This desire on the part of the House was partly the reason behind 
the Bill Amending the Minimum Wage and Minimum Holiday Allowance Act in connec-
tion with the introduction of administrative enforcement. This Act converts what is at the 
moment purely civil law enforcement of compliance with the Minimum Wage and Mini-
mum Holiday Allowance Act into administrative enforcement, in the form of an ability to 
impose administrative penalties.47 Whereas an employee receiving less than the statutory 
minimum wage currently has to embark on a civil law action against his employer, the 

                                                                      
43 Memo on Illegals. Additional Measures for the fight against illegality and dealing with those who exploit illegals 

in the Netherlands (Parliamentary Papers II, 2003/4, 28 537, no. 2). 
44 Many people regard the use of the term ‘illegals’ as offensive. In this context it means those who are residing in 

the Netherlands illegally. 
45 Parliamentary Papers II 2005/06, 29 537, no. 29. 
46 With the exception of Cyprus and Malta. 
47 Act of 5 March 2007 to Amend the Minimum Wages and Minimum Holiday Bonus Act in connection with the 

introduction of administrative enforcement , State Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 2007, 98. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 22 

Health and Safety Inspectorate [Arbeidsinspectie (AI)] will be able to impose an administra-
tive penalty on the employer, up to a maximum of €6,700 for each employee affected. The 
actual level of this penalty will depend on the extent of underpayment. If the employer 
should re-offend within 24 months, the penalty will be increased by 50%. After first allowing 
the employer one month within which to pay the employees the arrears of their wages, a 
time limit may be imposed, under threat of a daily penalty payment, within which the em-
ployer must pay the employees the wages due to them. If the employer fails to comply, then 
the daily penalty charge becomes due. 
This fortifies the position of employees and may counter individual abuse within employ-
ment relationships. The reason for introducing this administrative enforcement is that em-
ployees who are underpaid seldom file a complaint with the AI or commence legal action 
against their employers, as well as an expectation that workers from the new EU member 
states will be less inclined to do so than their native Dutch counterparts.48 This amendment 
might be used as a tool in the battle against THB. 

2.3 International 

2.3.1 Introduction 

Many agreements have been made within the major international organisations in recent 
years, binding and otherwise, about how to combat THB, and these have served as the driv-
ing force for national endeavours. The focus now lies on a project-oriented approach in the 
sphere of implementation. This section outlines the developments relevant to the Nether-
lands in the area of international legislation and regulations since the appearance of the third 
Report.  

2.3.2 United Nations 
 
– The UN has organised three meetings in relation to the United Nations Convention against 

Transnational Organised Crime and the UN Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Traffick-
ing in Persons, Especially Women and Children (hereafter the ‘Palermo Protocol’), which 
supplements that Convention, since these documents came into effect. The purpose of the 
meetings was to discuss the state of affairs in relation to the implementation of these 
documents by the Convention member states. The first meeting dealt principally with 
adapting national legislation to the requirements of the Convention and the Protocol, and 
covered penal legislation and the problems experienced by member states in its imple-
mentation, as well as the stimulation of international cooperation. The second meeting fo-
cussed primarily on protecting and assisting victims, as well as repatriating victims and de-
veloping indicators for forced labour.49 The third meeting50 again focussed on the protec-

                                                                      
48 According to the Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the Bill. 
49 From 28 June to 6 July 2004 and from 10 to 21 October 2005. The meetings also related to the implementation 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 23 

tion and repatriation of victims, but also covered prevention, exchange of information and 
training. 

– In January 2005, the Dutch Government published the Fourth Dutch Implementation Re-
port on the UN Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women 
(CEDAW - UN Women’s Convention) 2000-2004. The Committee on the Elimination of all 
forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW Committee)51 discussed this at its 37th 
meeting.52 In the report, the Dutch government explored the recommendations from the 
CEDAW Committee on the second and third Dutch implementation reports to 
CEDAW. Human trafficking was dealt with in the report, partly because the UN Conven-
tion contains a provision (Article 6) on trafficking in women.53 Information about the 
NRM, the investigation and prosecution of THB, the B-9 regulation, victim support and 
the Dutch contribution to the international podium was supplied in the context of the 
state of affairs as regards Article 6. The abolition of the general ban on brothels was also 
explained, and an indication was provided of developments in policy and practice in that 
area. There was however a sizeable gap between the period covered by the report and the 
moment at which the CEDAW Committee dealt with it. The information in the report 
dated from 2003, while there have been several developments in the battle against THB 
and in relation to prostitution since then. 

– As usual, NGOs prepared a shadow report, commenting on the government report, for 
the CEDAW Committee. The shadow report in response to the Fourth Implementation 
Report came out on 15 June 2006 and was entitled Taking Women’s Rights Seriously? The 
NGOs confirmed in the shadow report that there had been improvements in 2005 as re-
gards the B-9 regulation, but that there were still major problems in relation to how the 
regulation is applied and structural shortcomings in the regulation itself. The NGOs con-
cluded that the current regulation is inadequate for meeting the needs and interests of victims. 

– The conclusions of the CEDAW Committee appeared in February 2007.54 
– In April 2006, de UN High Commissioner for Refugees55 issued interpretative guidelines for 

judicial appeal bodies and governments56on the application of the UN Convention relating 

                                                                      
of the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, which we are not considering here. 

50 Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime, Third 
Session, Vienna, 9-19 October 2006. 

51 UN CEDAW/C/NLD/4, 10 February 2005. 
52 The 37th meeting was held in New York from 15 January to 2 February 2007. 
53 Comments were also made on the traffic in women in the context of other Articles in the Convention, for 

instance Art. 1 (violence against women). 
54 The Netherlands was called on ‘to provide for the extension of temporary protection visa, reintegration and 

support services to all victims of trafficking’, including those who are not able or willing to cooperate in the 
investigation and prosecution of human traffickers: Concluding comments of the Committee on the Elimination of 
Discrimination against Women: Netherlands, CEDAW/C/NLD/CO/4, 2 February 2007. 

55 Its involvement in this subject area stems partly from its responsibility to guarantee that refugees, asylum 
seekers and similar categories of individuals do not fall victim to THB and partly from its responsibility to 
guarantee that (possible) victims are identified as victims, also when they return to their countries of origin, and 
receive the international protection prescribed in these circumstances. 

56 Guidelines on International Protection (UNHCR, 7 April 2006 - HCR/GIP/06/07). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 24 

to the Status of Refugees (hereafter ‘the Refugee Convention’) to victims of THB and indi-
viduals running the risk of becoming subject to trafficking. The crux of these guidelines is 
that the Refugee Convention can apply to (potential) victims of THB. For this to be the 
case, all of the requirements of the definition of refugee must be met. There must accord-
ingly be a reasonable fear of prosecution on one of the grounds of prosecution mentioned 
in the Convention.57 If this is the case, the (potential) victim can receive protection under 
the Refugee Convention. This protection is in addition to the protection contemplated 
under the Palermo Protocol. 

– The UNHCR guidelines draw no distinction between the various manifestations of THB, 
nor in relation to the age or sex of the (potential) victim. When interpreting the Refugee 
Convention in actual cases, however, being underage and being a woman seem to afford a 
greater likelihood of being covered by the scope of the Convention. 

– The aim of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers 
and Members of Their Families, abbreviated to the Migrant Workers’ Convention, is to 
promote equal treatment of migrants, including employment opportunities equivalent to 
those of state subjects. Since it came into effect on 1 July 2003, the number of states acced-
ing to the Convention has grown from 20 to 34. These do not, however, include any desti-
nation nations for migrants. The Convention may have an important part to play in ad-
dressing the exploitation of migrants, as it also contemplates the battle against inhumane 
living and working conditions, physical and sexual abuse and degrading treatment, includ-
ing slavery, servitude and forced or compulsory labour. The Netherlands does not intend 
to sign the Convention, however, because the absence of any distinction between legal 
and illegal migrant workers as regards the granting of rights, is incompatible with the un-
derlying principle of the Benefit Entitlement (Residential Status) Act [Koppelingswet]. 

– The United Nations Human Rights Commission decided at its 60th meeting, under the 
topic ‘human rights of women’, to appoint a Special rapporteur on trafficking in persons, es-
pecially in women and children.58 The job of this rapporteur is to focus on the human rights 
of victims of THB, and to report each year to the Commission, including any recommen-
dations on measures that might be required to protect victims’ human rights. The Com-
mission specifically asked the rapporteur to respond to reliable information on (possible) 
violations of human rights from actual or possible victims of THB, and to collaborate with 
other relevant rapporteurs, such as the Special Rapporteur on violence against women.59 The 
rapporteur was also asked to collaborate with relevant UN bodies, regional organisations 
and victims and their representatives. The rapporteur receives individual complaints of 
violations of human rights and undertakes working visits to countries in order to make 
recommendations, based on these visits, for improvements to the prevention of THB and 

                                                                      
57 These are race, religion, nationality and belonging to a particular social group or political conviction. 
58 E/CN.4/2004/L.62. The 60th meeting took place between 15 March and 23 April 2004, and the rapporteur was 

appointed on 8 October 2004 for a period of three years. 
59 The Special Rapporteur on violence against women visited the Netherlands in July 2006. The findings and rec-

ommendations can be found in the Report of the Special Rapporteur on violence against women, its causes and 
consequences, Yakin Ertürk, Mission to the Netherlands, A/HRC/4/34/Add.4, 7 February 2007. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 25 

how to deal with the problem, and for the improvement of the protection of victims’ hu-
man rights.  

 

Reports by the Special Rapporteur on trafficking in persons, especially in women and children 
The rapporteur has prepared three reports to date. A report appeared in 2004, in which she set out her 
mandate, operating methods, strategy and priorities.60 Her report of 2006 covered the relationship be-
tween THB and the demand for commercial sex.61 This report was criticised in many quarters.62 At the 
start of 2007, the rapporteur issued a report on forced marriages.63 

 
– Also under the heading of ‘human rights of women’, the Human Rights Commission at its 

60th meeting adopted a resolution on trafficking in women and children.64 This Resolu-
tion urged governments to deal with any factors that might encourage THB, to criminalise 
THB and to combat the use of the Internet as a facilitative tool for THB. 

– The General Assembly of the United Nations has also in numerous resolutions, reports 
and other documents commented on the subject of THB, frequently in the context of 
other topics such as the protection of migrants,65 transnational organised crime66 and the 
role of women in development.67 Specific to the subject of trafficking in women and girls, 
the General Assembly prepared a resolution emphasising, in addition to a summary of 
earlier documents concerning the fight against THB, the importance of data collection, in-
ternational cooperation, education, prevention and awareness campaigns.68 States were 
also called on to appoint, for example, a national rapporteur. 

– The Third Committee (social, humanitarian and cultural affairs) called for a more gender-
specific approach to THB in October 2006, by way of the Draft Resolution on Trafficking of 
Women and Girls.69 The Draft Resolution was designed to encourage the General Assem-
bly towards an approach more strongly oriented towards gender and age, on the assump-
tion that women and girls are more vulnerable to THB. It also encouraged international 
collaborative links. Governments were called on to counteract the demand for trafficked 

                                                                      
60 Integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective; report of the Special Rapporteur on 

trafficking in persons, especially women and children (E/CN.4/2005/71, 22 December 2004). 
61 Integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective; report of the Special Rapporteur on 

trafficking in persons, especially women and children (E/CN.4/2006/62, 20 February 2006). 
62 See, for example: Statement on the 2nd annual report of the special rapporteur on the human rights aspects of 

victims of trafficking in persons, especially women and children, Sigma Huda ‘Integration on the human rights 
of women and a gender perspective,’ Human Rights Council, United Nations, Geneva, September 2006 
(various authors, 2006, http://action.web.ca/home/catw/readingroom.shtml?x=92105&AA_EX_Session= 
5eaba40ee4341b3a016bee4f867c897d&sfgdata=4). 

63 Implementation of General Assembly Resolution 60/251 of 15 March 2006 entitled ‘Human Rights Council’; 
Report of the Special Rapporteur on the human rights aspects of the victims of trafficking in persons, especially 
women and children (A/HRC/4/23, 24 January 2007). 

64 Resolution on trafficking in women and girls, E/CN.4/2004/L.60. 
65 For example GA Resolution A/RES/59/194, 18 March 2005. 
66 For example GA Resolution A/RES/59/157, 3 February 2005. 
67 For example GA Resolution A/59/287, 20 August 2004. 
68 GA Resolution A/RES/59/166, 10 February 2005. 
69 See GA/SHC/3870, 9 November 2006. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 26 

women and girls and to make a greater investment in age – and gender – specific measures 
in the fight against THB. Governments were also to use prevention to stop the demand 
for sex tourism and to provide resources for victim rehabilitation programmes. In De-
cember 2006, the General Assembly then adopted a resolution on Trafficking in women 
and girls.70 

2.3.3 European Union 
 
– The Directive on the residence permit issued to third country nationals who are victims of traffick-

ing in human beings or who have been the subject of an action to facilitate illegal immigration, 
who cooperate with the competent authorities (hereafter ‘the Temporary Residence Permit 
Directive’) was adopted on 29 April 2004.71 This Directive is compulsorily applicable in 
EU member states to victims of THB and optional for ‘victims’ of people smuggling, and it 
offers these categories of individuals a period for reflection (of undefined duration) and a 
temporary residence permit insofar as the victim’s presence is required for investigation 
and prosecution, the victim clearly intends to cooperate in this and he or she has also bro-
ken all ties with the person(s) suspected of the crime. During the period of residence, the 
victim must be offered certain facilities in the areas of accommodation, protection, finan-
cial resources, language and translation help, medical assistance and training and em-
ployment, and the member state can offer free legal assistance. 

 

Implementation in the Netherlands 
The member states ought to have brought their primary and/or subordinate legislation in line with 
this Directive not later than 5 August 2006. In the spring of 2006, the Netherlands notified the EC of 
the completion of the implementation path for the Temporary Residence Permit Directive. The re-
gime set out there does not extend to people smuggling. 

 
The present B-9 regulation is formulated in broader terms than the requirements under 
the Directive. Unlike the Directive, the B-9 regulation applies not only to third-country 
nationals,72 but also to citizens of the EU,73 and it contains a separate regime for witnesses 
of THB; also, the period for reflection that has been chosen is not just an extremely mini-
mal one. The B-9 regulation also provides opportunities for continued residence, some-
thing not called for in the Directive and free legal assistance is also (potentially) available in 
the Netherlands. 

                                                                      
70 Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on the report of the Third Committee (A/61/438), Trafficking in 

women and girls, A/RES/61/144 (1 February 2007), 19 December 2006. The Secretary-General was also asked in 
this resolution to report to the General Assembly, during the 63rd session, on successful interventions and 
strategies for a gender-specific approach to THB. 

71 Directive 2004/81/EC, 29 April 2004 (OJ 2004, L 261, 6.8.2004). 
72 These are non-EEA citizens. 
73 With the exception of Dutch nationals. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 27 

– The EU Council of Ministers approved the Hague Programme at its meeting on 4 and 5 
November 2004.74 This is a medium-term programme for EU policy, containing ten pri-
ority areas for strengthening the scope of freedom, security and justice within the EU. 
One of these is the development of a balanced migration policy. This includes the imple-
mentation of measures against illegal migration and THB on the one hand and the prepa-
ration of a plan concerning legal migration on the other hand. The Hague Programme in-
vited the Council and the EC to prepare a plan in 2005 for developing community stan-
dards, best practices and mechanisms to prevent and fight against THB. An Action Plan 
was prepared with a view to realising the priorities within the Programme.75 This Action 
Plan states that a Communication on THB will be prepared and that there will be an 
evaluation and, where necessary, further development of legislation on THB and of the le-
gal framework for preventing and combating the practice of trafficking in human organs, 
tissue and cells. 

– An EC Experts Group on Trafficking in Human Beings started up in 2003.76 The 25 members 
take part in the Group in their individual capacity. The Group has advisory functions for 
the EC in connection with THB, and issues reports and opinions for that purpose. The 
Dutch member was elected to the chair. The first and most important task of the Experts 
Group was to prepare a report based on the Brussels Declaration,NRM3 in order to advise 
the EC on new initiatives in the fight against THB at the EU level. This report,77 which was 
submitted to the Commissioner for Justice, Freedom and Security, contained concrete 
proposals for implementation of the recommendations in the Brussels Declaration. The 
proposals cover issues as defining THB, victim support and assistance, law enforcement 
and topics that are constants in the fight against THB, such as the importance of human 
rights, migration, children, and the collection and exchange of data. Based partly on these 
recommendations, the EC prepared the Communication on the Fight against Trafficking in 
Human Beings. 

– The Communication on Fighting Trafficking in Human Beings - an integrated approach and 
proposals for an action plan78 was the long-awaited response by the EC to the report of the 
EU Experts Group and is also the formal implementation of the request under the Hague 
Programme to the Council and EC to prepare a plan for common standards and tried and 
tested methods for preventing and fighting THB and intensifying in the fight against ille-
gal immigration. The Communication covers a number of actions to be undertaken by the 
EU and/or the member states. 

– The underlying principle is that THB can only be tackled through an integrated approach 
based on respect for human rights, and by taking account of the fact that THB is a world-
wide phenomenon. The Communication makes the protection of human rights the key is-

                                                                      
74 EU Council, D/04/5, 5 November 2004. 
75 Action Plan to implement the Hague Programme for strengthening the scope of freedom, security and law in 

the European Union (OJ 2005, C 198, 12 August 2005). 
76 Decision of 25 March 2003, (OJ 2003, L 79, 26 March 2003). 
77 Report of the Experts Group on Trafficking in Human Beings (Brussels, 22 December 2004). 
78 Notice COM(2005) 514, 18 October 2005. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 28 

sue in the EU policy on THB. This covers not only the human rights of (possible) victims 
but also those of the suspects and perpetrators in THB cases. The Communication explic-
itly states that, under international law and international obligations, states which tolerate 
THB, or who do nothing about it, are violating human rights. Preventing and combating 
THB is described as a powerful driving force for the EU in its efforts to fight against illegal 
immigration. From this perspective, the Communication also contains measures in con-
nection with border checks and migration management. Eurojust and Europol have im-
portant parts to play in the fight against THB; member states are therefore urged to make 
(more) use of both bodies in their fight against THB. The promotion of equality is a cen-
tral issue in the fight against THB, because many of the (possible) victims are women, 
children of people from ethnic or other minority groups. Specifically with regard to chil-
dren, the Convention on the Rights of the Child must be a key element, and account must 
also be taken of other international mechanisms aimed specifically at the protection of 
children’s rights. The Communication also contains a plea for basing policies against THB 
on a clear picture of the scale of the problem. The importance of data collection at the na-
tional level, which can then be compared at the EU and global levels, is underlined. The 
EC will be investigating the options here. The member states are (once again) called on to 
appoint independent institutions, such a national rapporteur, who can collect information 
systematically and maintain an overview of national action plans. Finally, the Communi-
cation indicates how to organise coordination and collaboration in each country, between 
member states and the EU and between the EU and other countries, in order to achieve 
the aims of the policy directed against THB. It is worth pointing out that the EU looks be-
yond its own regional context here; it encourages worldwide collaboration with other 
countries and other international organisations. 

– In response to the invitation in the Hague Programme to put together a plan for develop-
ing community standards, best practices and mechanisms for preventing and fighting 
against THB, the Council prepared the EU plan on best practices, standards and procedures 
for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings (hereafter ‘the Human Trafficking 
Action Plan’).79 The Action Plan included core recommendations and action points from 
the Communication.80 The Action Plan was also partially based on the Expert Group’s 
report, and consists of an overview of actions in the area of co-ordinating EU efforts, 
mapping the problem, prevention, repression of demand, investigation and prosecution, 
protection of and assistance for victims, repatriation and reintegration, and external rela-
tions. It contemplates the involvement of the EU and its member states in the prevention 
of and fight against all forms of THB, as well as devoting attention to protecting, assisting 
and rehabilitating victims. The Action Plan states that an integral approach, based on re-
spect for human rights and taking account of the global nature of the problem, is impor-
tant for dealing effectively with the situation. The Council also regards a fact-based ap-

                                                                      
79 OJ 2005, C 311, 9 December 2005. 
80 The same applies to the recommendations stemming from a conference on THB organised by the EU 

presidency along with Sweden on 19 and 20 October 2005 in Brussels. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 29 

proach as being important, and emphasises the use of data collection in order to map out 
the nature and scale of the problem. A victim-oriented approach must be championed, 
with full protection of the victim’s human rights at every phase. In cases involving under-
age victims, this relates, in particular to the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child. 

 

The actions in the Action Plan 
For each action, the Action Plan cites the aim, the body responsible for implementation, the date by 
which the action should be completed and the indicators for assessment. Concrete actions include 
the organisation of a political debate on EU THB policy, the development of common guidelines for 
the collection of data and comparable indicators, the preparation of EU campaign material on pre-
vention, and the improvement of information exchange with and via Europol and Interpol. Meet-
ings should be organised on a range of subjects. While the introduction to the Action Plan indicates 
that it will be regularly updated, and while it sets definite deadlines, the coordination of the Plan’s 
implementation is not progressing in an optimal manner. The reason is that the responsibility for 
this coordination has not yet been specifically allocated to anyone, so that it depends on the Presi-
dent of the EU whether and to what extent there is any (further) implementation of the Action Plan. 
On the initiative of Finland, when holding the EU presidency, there was a discussion on the follow-
up to the Action Plan in November 2006 within the Multidisciplinary Group on Organised Crime.81 
The member states were called on to give their views on the desirability of a single point of contact in 
each member state for implementation of the Action Plan, the desirability and methodology for 
monitoring and evaluating the Plan, and the setting of priority areas for attention in the battle against 
THB. In December 2006, the Justice and Home Affairs Council noted the current state of affairs as 
regards the EU Human Trafficking Action Plan and called for continued supervision and evaluation 
of the measures it contained during 2007 and 2008. 

 
– On 27 May 2005, seven member states of the EU, including the Netherlands,82 concluded 

a Convention to intensify cross-border cooperation in the fight against crime. This ‘Con-
vention of Prüm’ specifically deals with the battle against terrorism, cross-border crime and 
illegal migration,83 which includes THB. The most important element of the Convention 
is the improvement of information exchange among the states party to this Convention. 
This involves, for instance, setting up and mutually opening up national DNA registers, 
making facilities available for computerised fingerprint identification, the provision of 
non-personal data and also personal data in certain circumstances. Provision has also been 
made for the secondment of document advisors in the member countries, who can advise 
and provide training on passport and visa related matters. Subject to strict conditions, the 
Convention also forms the basis for joint patrols and other joint actions on the territories 
of the states party to the Convention. There is also the option for mutual assistance, on re-
quest, in matters such as inquiring as to the residential address of an individual or – signifi-
cant in the context of the battle against THB – establishing whether an individual is pre-

                                                                      
81 Brussels, 15 November 2006 (15321/06 Limite). 
82 Belgium, Germany, Spain, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and Austria. 
83 Convention on the stepping-up of cross-border cooperation, particularly in combating terrorism, cross-border 

crime and illegal migration (EC, Brussels, 7 July 2005 (28.07) 10900/05). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 30 

pared to make a statement. The Convention contains extensive provisions on data protec-
tion. A check will be made within three years after it entered into force as to whether the 
provisions in the Convention can be brought within the legal framework of the EU. 
Finland is considering accession to the Convention84 and Italy, Portugal and Slovenia have 
also expressed their interest. 

– Prompted by a report from one of its members,85 the European Parliament (EP) adopted 
the resolution entitled Strategies to prevent the trafficking of women and children who are vul-
nerable to sexual exploitation.86 In this resolution, the EP states that, despite many treaties, 
declarations, laws and rules, no truly tangible improvements have been achieved in the 
fight against THB, particularly as regards trafficking in women and children. The EP calls 
for a ‘holistic and integral multi-disciplinary approach to the problem at EU and interna-
tional levels’ and underlines the importance of an approach based on human rights. The 
resolution goes on to summarise a large number of issues considered important by the EP 
in the battle against THB. These include matters such as the establishing of clear targets, 
such as a 50% reduction in the number of victims over the next 10 years,87 a more coherent 
policy acknowledging the relationship between THB and migration, improvement of op-
erational collaboration, more research into the underlying causes of THB, discourage-
ment of the demand side, the launching of an EU awareness campaign and the appoint-
ment of national rapporteurs by the member states. The European Council is called on to 
make an annual assessment of steps taken in the member states to counter THB, and the 
member states are asked to criminalise clients who knowingly and willingly use the ser-
vices of coerced prostitutes. The resolution is not a binding one. 

– Migration is an important topic for the EU. Because of its relatively high levels of welfare, 
the EU has a great power of attraction for (labour) migrants, who try to enter the EU both 
legally and illegally. On the instructions of the EC, research was carried out as to whether 
opportunities for entering the EU legally had a discouraging effect on illegal immigration, 
and the extent to which legal immigration policy influenced cooperation with third coun-
tries in the battle against illegal migration The EC presented the results of this research in 
the Communication on the study on the links between legal and illegal migration.88 One of the 
conclusions was that there may well be a link between legal and illegal migration, but that 
it is a complex one and definitely not a direct link. With specific reference to THB, the 
Communication only states that the power of attraction of the ‘black’ labour circuits is a 
significant factor in the continuing illegal migration, and that many workers in the infor-
mal economy are denied the rights enjoyed and exercised by other workers.  

                                                                      
84 According to a press release from the Finnish government dated 5 December 2006 (Finland’s accession to the 

Convention of Prüm under discussion in Parliament). 
85 Report on strategies to prevent the trafficking of women and children who are vulnerable to sexual exploitation 

(A6-0400/2005), 14 December 2005. 
86 EP Resolution P6_TA-PROV(20060005), 17 January 2006. 
87 This wrongly assumes that the number of victims of THB is a known figure. It is quite possible that the extra 

attention being sought in relation to the subject will have precisely the effect of increasing the number of 
victims who are identified. 

88 Communication COM(2004) 412, 4 June 2004. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 31 

– In 2005, the EC followed up with a Communication (containing a) Policy Plan on Legal Mi-
gration (hereafter the ‘Legal Migration Communication’).89 This Communication, pre-
pared in response to a call in the Hague Programme and following on the Green Paper on an 
EU Approach to Managing Economic Migration,90 describes the proposed actions and legis-
lative initiatives of the EC towards a coherent policy in relation to legal immigration into 
the EU, taking into account the impact of this for third countries. The only comment in 
this Communication in relation to THB is that admission of economic migrants is inextri-
cably linked with integration measures on the one hand and the battle against illegal im-
migration and illegal employment, including THB, on the other hand. The EU must inten-
sify its efforts towards reducing the informal economy, since this economy is an obvious 
factor attracting illegal immigration, and a catalyst for exploitation. The subject of THB 
received more attention in the Communication on policy priorities in the fight against illegal 
immigration by third country nationals.91 This Communication refers to the EU Human 
Trafficking Action Plan, and comments that the latter sets out the agenda for the fight 
against THB in the medium term. It adds that the EU will continue to provide finance, 
primarily via its policy development measures, to abolish the factors that render people 
vulnerable to THB, such as poverty, discrimination and inadequate access to educational 
opportunities. A basic principle in targeting illegal immigration is the removal of attractive 
factors; illegal employment is one of the most important of these. It undermines the credi-
bility of legal opportunities for immigration, and can result in serious exploitation which 
cannot be tolerated within the EU, according to the Communication. It also states the pri-
orities of the EC for implementation of the Action Plan on THB: the development of co-
ordination and cooperation mechanisms at the EU level, the promotion of best practices 
in detection and victim support, the formation of networks involving international and 
non-governmental organisations, and the development of guidelines for data collection. 
The Communication has been submitted to the Council of the European Parliament for a 
response. 

– The draft Directive on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning ille-
gally staying third-country nationals92 contains general standards for the (compulsory) re-
turn of third-country nationals who reside in EU illegally, respecting their human rights. 
The draft specifies that the Directive will apply except insofar as more favourable provi-
sions apply, including those formulated in the Temporary Residence Permit Directive. Since 
the latter applies to victims of THB, the draft Directive will (often) not apply to them. 

– In the run-up to the 2006 Football World Cup, the EP presented the Resolution on forced 
prostitution in the context of world sports events.93 In this, the EP called on the Council and 

                                                                      
89 Communication COM(2005) 669, 21 December 2005. 
90 COM(2004) 811, 11 January 2005. 
91 COM(2006) 402, 19 July 2006. This Communication is a supplement to the Legal Migration Communication 

and states that many phenomena can be understood to fall within the expression ‘illegal immigration’, including 
illegal entry as a result of THB. 

92 Directive of the European Parliament and Council COM(2005) 391, 1 September 2005. 
93 P6_TA-PROV(2006)0086, 15 March 2006. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 32 

the member states to embark on an EU-wide campaign to inform and instruct the general 
public, but principally sportsmen and their fans, about the problem of forced prostitution 
during major sporting events. This resolution was undoubtedly prompted by the widely 
expressed opinion that the Football World Cup would result in a huge (temporary) in-
crease in demand for sexual services, and therefore also possibly for THB. The German 
government, NGOs and the World Cup organisers took various steps to counteract 
forced prostitution. There was, however, no evidence of the feared increase in forced 
prostitution; preliminary data from the German Ministry for Families, Parents, Women & 
Children shows that there was actually a decrease in the number of (reported) cases of 
THB around the time of the World Cup. An investigation by IOM/SIDA led to the same 
conclusion.94 

– In this Resolution, the EP repeated its request to set up a Day against Trafficking in Hu-
man Beings. This proposal has been accepted by the EC.  

– The Palermo Protocol, signed by the EU on 12 December 2000, was approved on behalf of 
the Community on 14 July 2006.95 The scope of the EC powers to accede to the Protocol, 
and thus the extent to which the Community is bound to it, is limited to the areas in which 
it has exclusive external powers: development cooperation (Article 179 EU Treaty); eco-
nomic, financial and technical cooperation with third countries (Article 181A EU Treaty); 
and visa, asylum, immigration and other policy areas associated with the free movement 
of individuals (Title IV, EU Treaty). 

2.3.4 Council of Europe 
 
– The Recommendation Domestic slavery: servitude, au pairs and ‘mail-order brides’ was added to 

the long list of recommendations from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of 
Europe in 2004.96 The Assembly confirmed that thousands of people are being held as 
slaves in Europe despite the abolition of slavery. These are mainly women working in pri-
vate households, as migrant domestic workers, au pairs or mail-order brides. Many of 
them arrived voluntarily but some were misled, bound by debt contracts and trafficked. 
The Council of Europe (CoE) has to be in the forefront of the battle against all forms of 
slavery, according to the Assembly, which makes recommendations to the Committee of 
Ministers to undertake the fight against THB. These are subdivided into general recom-
mendations and recommendations relating to domestic slavery, au pairs and mail-order 
brides. Apart from calling for the preparation of a charter of rights for domestic staff and 
guidelines for the recognition and protection of the status of au pairs, the recommenda-
tions relate principally to matters covered in the CoE Convention to combat trafficking in 
persons. 

                                                                      
94 See www.sida.se/shared/jsp/download.jsp?f=World+Cup+Study+Final+Report.pdf &a=25626. 
95 Appendix C to Council decision 11384/06, 14 July 2006. The same decision also approved the UN Protocol on 

People Smuggling on behalf of the EC. 
96 PA Recommendation 1663 (2004). 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 33 

– The Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (hereafter 
the CoE Human Trafficking Convention)97 is the result of the discussions in the Comité 
Ad Hoc sur la lutte contre la Traite des Êtres Humains (CAHTEH).NRM3 The Convention was 
accepted by the Committee of Ministers on 3 May 2005 and opened up for signature on 16 
May 2005. The Convention has been signed by 33 states – including the Netherlands98 – 
seven of which had also ratified it when writing this report.99 It enters into force when 10 
states have ratified it, of which at least eight are CoE member states.  

– The Convention takes as its starting point the Palermo Protocol, but applies to all forms of 
THB, both national and international, and whether or not associated with organised crime 
(Article 2).100 The human rights approach is one of the Convention’s important angles; ac-
cording to the preamble, THB is a violation of human rights and an offence to the dignity 
and the integrity of the human being.101 The purposes of the Convention (Article 1) are 
threefold: 1. preventing and combating THB, 2. protecting the human rights of victims and 
ensuring effective investigation and prosecution, and 3. promoting international coopera-
tion on action against THB. The Convention then continues with a large number of provi-
sions in which the Convention’s member states are urged to adopt measures, to a consid-
erable extent in mandatory language. While the original notion of the CAHTEH – that 
this should be a mandatory Convention on all fronts – has not been entirely achieved, the 
Convention goes further than other existing (international) documents as regards the ex-
tent of its compulsory character. 

 

Policy and other changes 
Based on the text of the Convention, BNRM has looked into which issues in the Convention necessi-
tate the amendment of Dutch policy and practice. The findings were communicated to the Ministry of 
Justice, and included the following observations. 
- In the Convention, the status of being a victim, and not the victim’s residential status, determines 

whether or not certain rights and facilities will be granted. Residential status is the predominant fac-
tor in the present B-9 regulation, however. The government could therefore consider producing a 
general regulation for all victims of THB, which would include a residence permit if necessary, rather 
than maintaining a specific regulation only for those victims who are foreign nationals. 

- The Convention urges that an indication be given of the precise limits of the expression ‘exploitation’ 
in the context of THB. 

- The Convention expects coordination at the national level among the various partners in the chain, 
which can be either public or private organisations or agencies. This sort of umbrella coordination in 

                                                                      
97 Warsaw, 16 May 2005 (Council of Europe Series of Treaties, no. 197). 
98 The Netherlands signed on 17 November 2005. 
99 The position at 17 April 2007: the ratifying countries are Moldavia (19 May 2006), Romania (21 August 2006), 

Austria (12 October 2006), Albania (7 February 2007), Georgia (14 March 2007), Slovakia (27 March 2007) and 
Bulgaria (17 April 2007). 

100 On the last 2 points in particular, there is still discussion on the scope of application of the UN Protocol. By 
including Article 2, any such discussion is avoided for this Convention. 

101 A proposition to which the Dutch government has never yet subscribed in as many words, but which now 
appears to have been accepted with the proposed ratification. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 34 

action against THB does not exist at the moment, and this might be regarded as a call to set up a Task 
Force on THB.  

- The adoption of a range of measures, in various areas, to discourage the demand that leads to THB 
requires an impetus, for example taking the form of a broad public campaign. 

- The Netherlands must strengthen its alert systems and approach to THB by means of training and 
public-private cooperation. 

- The obligation to adopt measures in order to identify foreign nationals who are victims of THB be-
fore they are expelled from the country means that the Memorandum on Illegal Aliens [Illegalennota] 
has to be adjusted to the extended definition of THB. 

- When there are signs of THB, and any uncertainty about the age of a juvenile, the presumption must 
be that he or she is a minor. This makes it extra important that, if there is any doubt about age during 
the (first) interview under asylum procedures, there should also be extra watchfulness for any signs 
of THB. 

- A victim’s right to assistance should disconnected from his or her cooperation as a witness. Because 
this right is not connected to any specific point of time in the proceedings, it should also apply after 
the reflection period. As a consequence, the crucial requirement in the B-9 regulation for a victim re-
porting the crime should be deleted. The term ‘cooperation’ as used in the Convention has also a 
wider meaning than the obligation to report the crime in order to be eligible for a renewable resi-
dence permit. 

- The Convention cites the competent authority’s opinion that residence is deemed necessary owing to 
the victim’s personal situation as being grounds for the (obligatory) issue of a renewable residence 
permit. 

- Compensation for the victim is formulated in terms of a right, which raises the question of how such 
a right can be put into practice if a perpetrator cannot be found or has no detectible assets. 

- In the event of repatriation and return of victims, there seems to be an assumption that an analysis of 
the individual victim’s security situation will be carried out by the country initiating the return. 

- The current B-9 regulation does not include any obligation to take steps to protect the family mem-
bers of victims and witnesses of THB. There is a question as to how such a far-reaching obligation 
could be implemented in practical terms. 

 
– The Convention provides for the setting up of a group of independent experts (GRETA) 

which will monitor the implementation of the Convention. For an international docu-
ment in the field of THB, this is a unique instrument. The intention is that GRETA, based 
on information which the member states to the Convention are obliged to supply, will 
prepare an analysis of the Convention's implementation by the member states, supple-
mented by recommendations on how to address any identified bottlenecks. Its report will 
be published after an opportunity has been given to make and receive comments on it, 
thus including the right to hear and be heard. Because the Convention does not provide 
any procedure for enforcing the implementation of recommendations, the main impetus 
providing this monitoring mechanism with persuasive force will be the ‘public pillory ef-
fect’. The election procedure for the election of the experts (between 10 and 15 in number) 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 35 

who will sit on GRETA has to be determined within one year after the Convention enters 
into force.102 

– The Action Plan was also adopted at the meeting in 2005 of heads of state and government 
leaders of the member states of the Council of Europe, during which the CoE Human 
Trafficking Convention was accepted.103 This Action Plan sets out the principle tasks of 
the CoE over the next few years. The battle against THB is mentioned under the heading 
‘Strengthening the Security of European Subjects’, and is determined by the CoE Human 
Trafficking Convention. Under the heading ‘Building a Europe for Children’, it was an-
nounced that a children's rights perspective will be implemented throughout the activities 
of the CoE. In this context, the three-year programme Building a Europe for and with Chil-
dren was launched, which is designed to deal with protecting children against all forms of 
violence, with attention to social, legal, health and educational dimensions. One form of 
violence is trafficking in, and abuse of, children. A new committee was set up to deal with 
implementation of this point: the Committee of Experts on the Protection of Children against 
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PC-ES). This committee comes under the European Com-
mittee on Crime Problems (CDPC), which specified the committee's tasks.104 One of these 
tasks is the drafting of a new legal (and partly binding) instrument to protect children 
against sexual exploitation and abuse. This instrument must be compatible with existing 
international instruments, and may not include issues relating to compensation for vic-
tims. It must include matters such as a monitoring mechanism, aspects of criminal proce-
dure (for example how children are interviewed) and the exchange of information.  

– In 2005, for the first time in its existence, the European Court of Human Rights estab-
lished the existence of a violation of Article 4 of the European Convention on Human 
Rights (ECHR), which sets out the prohibition against slavery, servitude and forced or 
compulsory labour. In the case of Siliadin v. France105 the Court held that French criminal 
law106 offered inadequate protection to a girl from Togo, working in a French household 
in very poor circumstances, against the servitude to which she was subjected by private 
individuals (see also Chapter 8). This case raised the question as to whether a member 
state can be held responsible by the European Court of Human Rights for a violation of 
this right, protected by the ECHR, by a private individual. The Court answered this ques-
tion in the affirmative. 

 

                                                                      
102 This is one of the reasons why the NRM has urged the Minister of Justice to proceed with ratification of the 

Convention as soon as possible.  
103 CM(2005)80 final, 17 May 2005. 
104 Decision of the CDPC on future work of the Committee of Experts on the protection of children against 

sexual exploitation and abuse (CDPC-BU (2006) 14 final, 21 July 2006. 
105 ECHR 26 July 2005, application no. 73316/01. 
106 The Court stated that only penal legislation could offer the intended effective and necessary protection against 

breaches of Art. 4 ECHR. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 36 

State responsibility for violations of human rights 
Once the Court had established that the girl was in a situation of servitude, as defined in Article 4 
ECHR, in the private household of a family, it saw itself as being faced with the question of whether this 
finding might lead to a conclusion that the French state had breached the European Convention on 
Human Rights. The prohibitions included in ECHR are aimed in the first instance at the parties to the 
Convention and not at private individuals. However, as Lawson (2005) argues in his case-note to the 
judgment, a line has developed in the case law of the European Court of Human Rights in the past 20 
years to effect that the rights incorporated in ECHR have a horizontal effect (i.e. they also apply 
among and between private individuals).107 This conclusion is (partly) based on the fact that the ECHR 
assumes a positive obligation on states to adopt such measures as are necessary to ensure the effective 
enjoyment of human rights. As a result of the conclusion in Siliadin that the parties to the Convention 
are obliged to incorporate into their criminal law such provisions as will criminalise the conduct speci-
fied in Article 4, ECHR, it is now established that the horizontal effect also applies in relation to this 
Article. ECHR also imposes not only an obligation to penalise this conduct but adds that these penal 
provisions must also be applied in practice.108 
The logical corollary to an obligation is a responsibility if that obligation is not fulfilled. In the ECHR 
context, what this means is that failure to (adequately) comply with the obligation to implement and 
enforce legislation and regulations results in a violation by the state of its obligations under the ECHR. 
The violation results in responsibility, which will usually take the form of an obligation to pay costs and 
damages. Thus, in the Siliadin case, the European Court of Human Rights ordered France to pay the 
costs for legal assistance that had been incurred by Siliadin. The Court did not deal substantively with 
the question of whether and if so how much compensation would have to be paid, as the plaintiff had 
not asked for any compensation. 

 
– The CoE embarked on the Campaign to combat trafficking in human beings in the spring of 

2006.109 The aim of the campaign, which runs until 2008 and uses the slogan ‘Human be-
ing – not for sale!’, is twofold. On the one hand it involves raising general awareness 
among governments, NGOs and society regarding the scale of THB in Europe. On the 
other hand, the campaign is designed to promote signature and ratification of the CoE 
Human Trafficking Convention by as many states as possible. The mayors and represen-
tatives of municipalities and local authorities from the CoE member states underlined 
their involvement in the campaign via the Congress of Local and Regional Authorities.110 

                                                                      
107 Bos-Ollerman (2006) makes a more detailed analysis of the doctrine of the horizontal effect of human rights in 

her study of literature on the implications of a human rights based approach to THB. She approaches this from 
a philosophical-historical perspective of human rights, in which she refers to ECHR case law, including the 
judgment in the case of Siliadin. 

108 The Court only mentioned repression here, not prevention, as was also confirmed by Lawson (2005) in his 
note on the judgment. Bos-Ollerman (2006) investigates the issue of state responsibility in cases of THB, from 
the perspectives of both repression and prevention, coinciding here with the CoE Human Trafficking 
Convention. 

109 Resolution 210 (2006) on the Council of Europe campaign to combat trafficking in human beings. 
110 The Congress of Local and Regional Authorities is an advisory body of the CoE, and with 315 members represents 

more than 200,000 European local and regional authorities, thereby giving expression to the views of local 
democracy. 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 37 

They prepared a Declaration111 in which they pledged to disseminate the campaign mes-
sage as widely as possible and to make the subject a top priority of their administrations. In 
this, they referred to their earlier Resolution on the fight against trafficking in human beings 
and their sexual exploitation: the role of cities and regions.112  

2.3.5 Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) 
 
– The appointment in May 2004 of the OSCE Special Representative on Combating Traffick-

ing in Human Beings, and the appointment of a special unit within the OSCE Secretariat – 
which, in conjunction with the Special Representative, form the Anti-Traffic Assistance Unit 
(ATAU) to assist member states in the battle against THB – were important events. The 
Special Representative presented a working plan in October 2004, to implement her task 
of translating the OSCE Action Plan on Trafficking in Human Beings into practice. In this, 
she explained how, first and foremost, she wanted to assist governments in the implemen-
tation of their obligations under the Action Plan113 by visiting the countries,114 attending 
and contributing to national and international conferences on THB, seeking media atten-
tion for the subject, keeping information on THB on the OSCE website up-to-date and 
presenting an annual report regarding progress in the fight against THB.115 From the very 
start, the Special Representative devoted her attention primarily to combating trafficking 
in children and labour exploitation, paying particular attention to victims. The Special 
Representative’s position meant that she could make a direct approach at government 
level, but she had contacts with all possible partners in the chain. This occurred under the 
motto ‘Alliance against Trafficking in Persons’. She obtained information on shortcom-
ings, pitfalls and best practices directly in the field from the chain partners. The Alliance 
Expert Coordination Team (AECT) was created on her initiative, partly with this in mind. 
This involves participation by experts in the field of combating THB from international 
organisations (such as ILO, IOM, CoE and UNODC), international NGOs (such as La 
Strada International, International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 
and Anti-Slavery International) and national experts (such as BNRM). The AECT oper-
ates as an independent platform where discussion can take place across the broad spec-
trum of THB, and where the aims are the streamlining of, and collaboration in, measures 
to deal with the problem. It also serves as a matrix, information source and advisory body 
for the Special Representative. In mid-2006, the Special Representative indicated that she 

                                                                      
111 Declaration on the fight against trafficking in human beings, Appendix to Resolution 210 (2006). 
112 Resolution 196 (2005). 
113 Workplan 2004-2005, Special Representative on Combating Trafficking in Human Beings (SEC.GAL/245/04, 

25 October 2004). An explanation of the Action Plan can be found in NRM3. 
114 Resulting in a report on the current situation in the fight against THB in the country in question, with 

information concerning prevention, detection and prosecution as well as victim support. A report of this type 
has appeared for most of the OSCE member states, including the Netherlands. The Dutch government has 
released this report for publication (see www.osce.org/documents/cthb/2005/12/18763_en.pdf), in contrast to 
(almost) all other countries. 

115 Review of 2005 and Outlook for 2006 (http://www.osce.org/documents/cthb/2005/12/17170_en.pdf). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 38 

would not be available for reappointment, and her successor was appointed on 19 Octo-
ber 2006. 

– The OSCE Parliamentary Assembly (PA) adopted a Resolution on combating trafficking in 
human beings at its 13th annual meeting.116 This resolution reaffirmed all of the previous 
opinions of the PA and called on the member states to implement earlier agreements, in-
cluding those set out in the OSCE Action Plan, the Palermo Protocol and the Optional 
Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography to the UN Conven-
tion on the Rights of the Child.117 The member states and the Council of Ministers of the 
OSCE were asked to devote specific attention to the role of the armed forces or peace 
missions based abroad in connection with the demand side for THB.118 

– At its 14th annual meeting,119 the PA reverted to this topic in a Resolution on combating in-
volvement in trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation and abuse by international 
peacekeeping forces.120 Proceeding on the assumption that the demand for commercial sex-
ual services forms a breeding ground for THB, the PA considered that measures were re-
quired to prevent and counter armed forces and civilian support staff involved in interna-
tional peace missions, as well as employees of international organisations, from making 
any contribution to the demand side of THB. The member states were called on to take 
measures for this purpose, in the form of primary and subordinate legislation, codes of 
conduct, and awareness campaigns, 

– The Permanent Council of the OSCE decided, during its 562nd plenary meeting, to add an 
Addendum to the OSCE Action Plan to combat trafficking in human beings: addressing the spe-
cial needs of child victims of trafficking for protection and assistance.121 This contains recom-
mendations to the member states as to how to deal with trafficking in children. The rec-
ommendations include criminalising trafficking in children, prevention, and assistance 
and protection focusing specifically on children. Also, research should be facilitated and 
training should be provided on how to recognise underage victims of THB. 

2.4 Points of attention and bottlenecks 

This chapter describes developments in the area of legislation and regulations since the ap-
pearance of the previous comprehensive Report (NRM3). What follow here are points of 
attention and bottlenecks that merit (repeated) mention. 

                                                                      
116 Edinburgh, from 5 to 9 July 2004. 
117 Descriptions of these documents are contained in NRM3, Chapter 2. 
118 The Council of Ministers was however unable to reach agreement, during its 12th meeting in Sofia on 6-7 

December 2004, on a resolution ‘Ensuring that International Forces and Missions Contribute to Preventing 
and Combating Trafficking in Human Beings’ proposed in pursuance of this call from the PA. 

119 Washington DC, 1-5 July 2005. 
120 OSCE PA, SC (05/2) 1 E. 
121 PC.DEC/685, 7 July 2005 (PC Journal No. 562). 



LEGISLATION AND REGULATIONS 

 39 

Human trafficking provision 
– Article 273f Criminal Code is a very extensive and complex provision, because the choice 

was made to have a single provision on THB, criminalising a large number of courses of 
conduct of disparate natures. The complicated wording leads to problems of interpreta-
tion. This is partly because of the use of a number of expressions from international legis-
lation, which are not explained by the Dutch legislator in detail. The exact definition of the 
key expression ‘exploitation’, as regards labour and services outside the sex industry, has 
been left to the courts. 

– It is remarkable that the THB Article does not criminalise the act of forcing someone to 
hand over income from (non-sexual) labour or services, although forcing someone to 
provide proceeds derived from (voluntary) sexual transactions or organ removal is crimi-
nalised under Article 273f Criminal Code. 

– The maximum sentence of six years for THB without aggravating circumstances is rela-
tively low. The level of the potential sentence has consequences for the possibility of pre-
trial detention, which may be undesirable, bearing in mind that THB is so obviously a 
shocking breach of public order. 

Other national primary and subordinate legislation 
– While there was a promise, as far back as 2000, that the general prohibition on issuing 

work permits for prostitutes from outside the EU would be abolished within the foresee-
able future, this prohibition is still in force. 

– The distinction between a report of an offence and a statement, relevant under the crimi-
nal law, is impractical in the context of the rules under migration law as far as victims of 
THB are involved. 

– In accordance with the new rules for continued residence after the expiry of the B-9, con-
tained in chapter B16/7 of the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines, a victim has to apply 
for a continued residence permit and is required to demonstrate his or her eligibility for it 
by handing over a copy of the court verdict in the criminal case as evidence. The victim, 
however, is not a party to that case and will not therefore (automatically) have a copy of 
the verdict. 

– The new rules on continued residence only mentions victims who have reported the of-
fence, while witnesses (or victim-witnesses) who cooperate in the investigation and prose-
cution also run the risk of reprisals if their cooperation has contributed towards the con-
viction of the trafficker. 

– In accordance with the amended criteria, it is important for continued residence after the 
B-9 regulation whether or not a conviction resulted from the THB prosecution. The 
amended criteria appear to imply that a conviction for THB is required. There are, how-
ever, other situations where the results of the criminal proceedings must lead to the as-
sumption that the law has established that repatriating the victim would involve risks. 

– While the second ground in the new rules for continued residence is intended to make the 
length of the victim’s residence the most important humanitarian factor to be considered, 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 40 

the fact that the wording proceeds on the basis of the date of conviction in the criminal 
case, does not prevent victims who have cooperated in the investigation and prosecution, 
depending on the length of the criminal proceedings, from being kept in uncertainty about 
their (continued) resident status in the Netherlands for more than three years. 

International 
– Despite medium-term policy documents, such as the EU Action Plan on Human Trafficking, 

EU Presidencies dealing with THB are not (adequately) building on the work of their 
predecessors. 

– The EU Action Plan on Human Trafficking excels principally in its many proposals for in-
ternational conferences on the subject. These do not, however, contribute towards a more 
effective approach to combat THB. 

– While the same terminological framework is increasingly being used at an international 
level, the terms ‘THB’ and ‘exploitation’ are still interpreted in various ways. 

– In light of the judgment of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Siliadin v. 
France and numerous international documents, it has been established (internationally) 
that THB constitutes a violation of human rights. 

– At the European level, the campaign against THB is placed to a significant extent within 
the context of combating illegal immigration. It is possible, however, (in practice) for there 
to be a degree of tension between these two aims.  

 



 41 

3 
 Victims and Victim Support 

3.1 Introduction 

This Chapter contains information about victims of trafficking in human beings (‘THB’) 
and the support available for them.  

3.2 Victims 

3.2.1 Some specific (risk) groups 

Minors (children) 
The third BNRM report devoted considerable attention to minors as a specific group of vic-
tims of THB. It indicated that the traffic in children was not just a remote phenomenon, and 
also that it was not easy to obtain reliable information on the subject. 
A joint study by ECPAT-Netherlands, Defence for Children International (DCI) and 
UNICEF Netherlands into the exploitation of children in the Netherlands provided greater 
clarification on who the (possible) victims of exploitation were and where and how they 
were exploited. Using file research, interviews with workers at 221 institutions and ‘peer re-
search’,1 a database containing information on 230 victims2 was set up. While exploitation as 
defined in Article 273f of the Dutch Criminal Code was not established in all of the docu-
mented cases, and while many of the cases lacked relevant information, the research pro-
vides an alarming picture of what can happen to underage children in the Netherlands. 
 

Some results from An Insight into Exploitation 
- 169 of the cases (73%) involved exploitation in prostitution, with 40 cases (17%) involving other forms 

of exploitation and 21 cases (9%) involving a combination of the two. 
 
Exploitation in prostitution 
- most underage victims of exploitation in prostitution were between the ages of 13 and 17;3 
- they came from 31 countries; 
- more than 40% of these victims were of native or non-native Dutch origin,4 36% were Dutch nation-

als and 13% resided illegally in the Netherlands; 
- by far the majority of victims were girls (93%); 
- factors rendering underage children vulnerable to exploitation in prostitution: emotional depend-

ence (45%) and (each of these applicable in more than 20% of the cases) lack of papers and family cir-

                                                                      
1 Former victims interviewed other victims and (former) victims. 
2 These were minor children who suffered exploitation between 2003-2005. 
3 Age was not known for 40% of the victims. 
4 The country of origin was not known for 22% of the victims. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 42 

cumstances (e.g. broken families, deceased parents, domestic rows). Also (each applying to between 
10% and 20% of the cases): threats (by loverboys/pimps or family members) and financial reasons. 
Other factors increasing vulnerability (applicable in less than 10% of the cases): drug addiction, sexual 
abuse and homelessness. 

 
Other forms of exploitation 
- the other forms of exploitation related principally to illegal adoption (27%) and domestic work (17%), 

but also included the transportation of drugs, cleaning work, deception by offering a ‘football con-
tract’,5 and exploitation in the catering sector (each applicable in 5%-10% of the cases), and exploita-
tion in crime, in small businesses, and taking the form of arranged marriages (each applicable in 2% of 
the cases); 

- there was a relatively high proportion of young children (25% below the age of 8) among underage 
victims of other forms of exploitation: the illegally adopted children. For 9- to 12-year-olds (10%), the 
exploitation centred around domestic work, cleaning work and the catering sector; 

- the proportion of young males affected by this form of exploitation was larger than for exploitation 
in prostitution, at 27%. 42% of the victims were girls;6 

- the victims came from 17 countries;7 
- only 5% were Dutch nationals and a large proportion (37%) resided in the Netherlands illegally; 
- factors rendering underage children vulnerable to other forms of exploitation: family circumstances 

(55%), lack of papers (27%) and emotional dependence (27%). In addition (with each applicable to be-
tween 10%-15% of the cases) financial reasons, homelessness and threats (from family members or 
through blackmail with pornographic pictures of the minors) and (in 2% of the cases) sexual abuse. 
Other factors that increased vulnerability, such as age (in cases involving illegal adoption and smug-
gling drugs in babies' nappies), were involved in 45% of the cases. 

(Source: Van den Borne & Kloosterboer, 2005). 

What the researchers said was that the legislature should clarify which forms of exploitation 
of underage children were contemplated by the THB Article. In order to obtain a national 
picture of the nature and scale of the problem, information should be recorded in a uniform, 
clear and complete manner, and should be distributed among all of the partners in the chain. 
Information and training should result in improved prevention, identification, reception and 
support for victims as well as better detection and prosecution of suspects. Victims who are 
minors should obtain a residence permit on humanitarian grounds and the international co-
operation between the various institutions should be improved, according to the researchers. 

Underage children who have a slight intellectual impairment are particularly vulnerable to 
exploitation. There are indications that the recruitment activities of loverboys (see 3.4) in-
clude girls with a slight intellectual impairment. Individuals who have any such impairment 
are not only vulnerable to exploitation in the sex industry but also to exploitation in other 
sectors. 

                                                                      
5 The African youngsters in question had paid for their trip and were then left to their own fate at Schiphol 

airport. 
6 Gender was unknown for 30% of the victims. 
7 The country of origin was not known for 32% of the victims. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 43 

(Former) unaccompanied underage asylum seekers (AMAs) 
In the third Report, attention was paid to the following topics: the fact that some unaccom-
panied underage asylum seekers (AMAs) are brought to the Netherlands with a view to ex-
ploitation (in prostitution); the situation in the reception centres, which is not a safe one in 
every respect (e.g. Brouns et al., 2003); and the risks associated with the policy on AMAs. 
This policy means that anyone arriving in the Netherlands at the age of 15 or above, and who 
has not been acknowledged as a refugee, must leave the country when they turn 18. When 
this policy was finalised, there were comments from various quarters that there was a sig-
nificant likelihood that many of the youngsters concerned would prefer illegal residence 
over repatriation to their country of origin, with all of the consequences this entailed, includ-
ing exploitation (e.g. Alien Affairs Advisory Committee, 2003; ECPAT, 2003; Council for 
the Application of Criminal Law, 2004).8 These concerns appear to have been well-founded. 
The purpose of the AMA campus in Vught, focusing on repatriation, was not achieved. Of 
the 436 AMAs placed there, only six returned to their countries of origin, with most leaving 
for destinations unknown (Klaassen and de Prez, 2004). The campus was closed and the re-
ception houses for repatriated AMAs in Angola (opened in 2003) and the Democratic Re-
public of Congo (opened in 2005) scarcely received any youngsters from this target group. 
The Youth Care Inspectorate (2006) also confirmed that not many AMAs were working 
towards repatriation and that some were ending up becoming illegals. According to the 
evaluation by Klaassen and de Prez, one important learning point is that a more individualis-
tic approach to AMAs offers a better basis for increasing their motivation to return than the 
group-oriented approach taken at the campus. An experiment was undertaken at one of the 
AMA sites in 2006 in the context of the project The Fight against Human Trafficking, with 
very intensive support for AMAs at risk, which took the form of constantly following the 
AMAs in question. This went well in the sense that the AMAs concerned did not disappear, 
but it was extremely time-consuming and probably only temporarily effective, so that 
Hiemstra and Hurkens (2006b) did not recommend it as a national approach. 

In 2005, the policy rules on terminating the provision of living allowances came into effect: 
the project for terminating allowances for former AMAs (PLEXA). 

PLEXA had a major influence on the situation of former AMAs. According to SAMAH, the 
national interest organisation for young asylum seekers, some of the youngsters left for their 
country of origin, often with support from the International Organisation for Migration 
(IOM), but most opted, at least in the first instance, to stay here illegally (Annual Report, 
2005). The response from the LOGO9 to PLEXA and letters from municipal authorities 

                                                                      
8 In an opinion dated 24 March 2004 on progress with and implementation of the policy note Unaccompanied 

Minor Asylum Seekers. 
9  National Consultative Body for Municipal Administrations on reception and return policy [Landelijk Overleg 

Gemeentebesturen Opvang]. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 44 

also referred to the approach developed in Utrecht, offering (greater) prospects, and which 
has since been followed up in many municipalities.  

There has been a great deal of commotion during the past two years concerning the disap-
pearance of AMAs for unknown destinations and the fact that they might be ending up as 
victims of exploitation.10 These are mostly AMAs who are being obliged to leave, often after 
a few years of legal residence, but also include some who had only been in the Netherlands 
for a short period. The problem concerning AMAs leaving for unknown destinations had been 
known about for some time (see, e.g., Rijken, 2000) and led the organisations in the immigra-
tion chain11 to set up the Protocol Vermissing Ama [Protocol on Missing AMAs] in 2003. 
 

The Protocol on Missing AMAs 
The Protocol contains guidelines to prevent AMAs from going missing and to deal with any missing 
persons situation involving AMAs that still occur. With respect to the process of dealing with missing 
persons, the Protocol involved arrangements about which chain partner should undertake which ac-
tion during a particular timescale. It quickly became clear, however, that the Protocol was not being 
used by the chain partners and sometimes was not even known. Nor was it clear who was in charge of 
the Protocol, which was also felt to be very complex and extensive (see also Kromhout and Leijstra, 
2006). There was confusion about who should report missing persons, missing AMAs were not al-
ways reported12 and the police were not always prepared to record reports of a criminal offence. The 
Protocol is being adjusted.13 

The frequency of departure for unknown destinations from reception facilities gave rise to a 
study by the Scientific Research and Documentation Centre (WODC) into repatriation and 
departure for unknown destinations among 15 to 17-year-old AMAs who had not (yet) ob-
tained a residence permit. The research showed that the numbers of AMAs in the Nether-
lands leaving for unknown destinations amounted to 499 in 2004 and 322 in 2005, repre-
senting 79% and 84% respectively of all departing AMAs (Kromhout and Leijstra, 2006). 
Kromhout and Leijstra interviewed 21 AMAs in relation to their views on repatriation and 
illegal residence. Most of the interviewees were negative about repatriation. Eleven of the 
youngsters disapproved of the idea of living as an illegal, and six of them felt that living as an 
illegal was in any event better than repatriation. The position was not clear for three of the 
youngsters. 
The Additional Measures to the NAM include a proposal for raising awareness among organi-
sations working with youngsters about indications of THB, so that they can recognise ex-

                                                                      
10 Dozens of Chinese and Indian AMAs disappeared from reception. There are signs that some are being 

exploited. Nigerian girls also disappear. 
11 The police, the People Smuggling Information and Analysis Centre (IAM), KMar, IND, COA and the De 

Opbouw Foundation (now NIDOS). The former Reception Centre Valentijn and the Beatrixoord Reception 
Centre were also involved in its preparation (CD-ROM Protocol Vermissing Ama). 

12 Departure for an unknown destination is not always a source of concern: support staff are sometimes aware 
that an AMA has gone to family abroad, and sometimes there has even been contact after the AMA has left. 

13 Letter from the Minister for Immigration and Integration to the Lower House dated 5 December 2006. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 45 

ploitation of minors at an early stage. Another development in this context is that the Exper-
tise Centre on THB and People Smuggling (EMM) is attempting to record indications of 
AMAs who might be victims of exploitation or who might be at risk of becoming victims. 
EMM is collaborating on this with IND, COA, BLinN, Foundation against Trafficking in 
Women [Stichting Tegen Vrouwenhandel (STV)] and the Dutch Council for Refugees 
[Vluchtelingenwerk Nederland]. Further measures being taken to improve the safety of this 
group of minors include 24-hour supervision and support at the reception sites and the tak-
ing of fingerprints at the start of the procedure. It should also soon be possible to arrange the 
custody for these minors within 24 hours (Letter from the Minister for Immigration & Inte-
gration to the Lower House dated 5 December 2006). In the same letter, the Minister an-
nounced a pilot study on secure reception14 and possibly also electronic supervision for 
AMAs who are subject to a significant risk of disappearing (at that point, AMAs from India 
and Nigeria).15  
In the loverboy project in Zwolle, there were actually few questions about prevention in re-
lation to AMAs (Kool, 2005),16 but 6% of the victims of exploitation in prostitution in the 
research carried out by Van den Borne and Kloosterboer were AMAs. While no cases of ex-
ploitation in sectors other than the sex industry were found either in this research or the 
BNRM research into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry (see Chapter 8),17 it 
is nonetheless important for organisations to remain alert to the possibility of male and fe-
male AMAs being vulnerable to exploitation, in the sex industry or elsewhere. 

Asylum seekers 
The research by Brouns et al. (2003) into the safety of women and girls in central asylum re-
ception (Central Agency for the Reception of Asylum Seekers, COA) resulted in a range of 
measures, such as adaptations to the physical environment, policy measures designed to in-
crease manageability in the sites (adjustment of house rules, development of a protocol for 
dealing with discrimination, intimidation and violence), training in order to increase 
women's powers of resistance and training of the staff aimed at identifying unsafe situations. 
The Combating Trafficking in Human Beings project started in 2006 with the aim of investigat-
ing whether and how the Central Agency for the Reception of Asylum Seekers (COA) 
might prevent trafficking in human beings and prostitution, and also develop and imple-
ment policy. 
 

                                                                      
14 Secure reception actually started at the end of 2006 in the form of the 24-hour supervision and support 

mentioned earlier. 
15 The IND is working on the development of risk profiles, to allow earlier and more systematic recognition of 

risk groups. 
16 AMAs were classified as a risk group at the start of the project. 
17 Van den Borne and Kloosterboer (2005) do in fact point out that the status of many victims (43%) is unknown. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 46 

The COA project ‘Combating THB’ 
Some conclusions: 
- residents can live fairly anonymously in the reception centres and visitors have fairly easy access. 

Once in a while residents undertake prostitution activities on site; 
- the current registration system for reporting incidents is not suited for registering ‘soft’ information 

(suspicions and signs). There is no link between information from the Temporary Aliens Emergency 
Facilities [Tijdelijke Noodvoorziening Vreemdelingen (TNV)]18 and regular reception facilities. Any po-
tentially relevant information at the earliest stages of reception (concerning prostitution, anxious be-
haviour, crime) is therefore lost; 

- the COA’s internal facilities for enforcing the regime are confined to retention of spending money 
and (temporary) removal from the centre. These facilities will have no effect in relation to any signs 
of THB; 

- unaccompanied underage asylum seekers who leave for an unknown destination are reported as 
missing. The same does not apply to adults; 

- the contacts between the COA and local police and Aliens Police are generally good, although feed-
back from the police could be improved; 

 
Recommendations for increasing safety at reception centres: 
- increase the knowledge and skills of COA staff in relation to THB; 
- develop a vision on combating THB and prostitution and translate this into practical implemen 

tation; 
- strengthen the process of identifying, registering and reporting: report any signs to the correct inves-

tigation services and to a central reporting point within the COA; 
- develop an approach for identifying potential victims of THB (using risk profiles) and follow and 

support them from the time of their arrival; 
- improve the cooperative approach and information exchange, particularly cooperation with the po-

lice, the Public Prosecution Service, the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee (KMar) and the IND. 

The COA has decided to extend the ‘Combating Trafficking in Human Beings’ Project and to 
regard it as the foundation for the Safety Reporting Point within the Reception Directorate of 
the COA, which is to be set up in 2007. 

Victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 
It is widely known that victims of exploitation in the sex industry are reluctant to come for-
ward with their experiences. This also applies, however, to victims of exploitation in sectors 
other than the sex industry. They do not always view themselves as victims, but the problem 
can also relate to the fact that their residence or employment status might be illegal, they 
might fear being deported or fear that their statements might have adverse consequences for 
their colleagues (who might also be working illegally), the fact that the situation in their 
country of origin might be even worse, or the build-up of debts. Threats can also play their 

                                                                      
18 These COA facilities are occupied by asylum seekers who cannot immediately be interviewed by the IND after 

they report to the Application Centre. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 47 

part in some situations of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry, and the victims 
of this type of exploitation may also be ashamed of the situation in which they have landed. 

3.2.2 Victims ‘in numbers’ 

STV victim registration 
One of the tasks of the Foundation against Trafficking in Women [Stichting Tegen Vrouwen-
handel (STV)] is to register (suspected) victims of THB. This means that all bodies who are 
(or think they might be) dealing with a victim – for example the police or social services, but 
also concerned citizens – can report this to the STV, where this is recorded.NRM3 The police 
are obliged to report any cases they encounter. Others will often submit reports because the 
STV is able to do something for them, such as the (indirect) organisation of reception or 
other facilities for the victim or the provision of expert advice. Not every victim is reported, 
and the STV does not know everything about every victim who is reported. For instance, 
more is often known about victims placed in reception facilities than about victims reported 
by concerned citizens, with whom the STV has no further involvement. It also happens that, 
after they are reported, clients disappear from view and files become spread out across a 
range of organisations (STV Annual Report, 2005). The STV does not have the capacity to 
retrieve this information.19 It is also impossible to exclude the possibility of duplication, cer-
tainly where information is limited. 

This section contains information on the victims registered by the STV; following a dip in 
2003, the numbers have been increasing in recent years. In 2004 there were 403, and in 2005 
424.20 The information covers some basic background factors for the victims, such as coun-
try of origin, age and gender. We go on to present, so far as possible and relevant, more de-
tailed background information for 2005.21 The information in this section is based partly on 
the STV Annual Reports and partly on the files provided by the STV.22 This has (minor) 
consequences for the number of registered (possible) victims we present for 2004.23 

                                                                      
19 An attempt is made to collect any missing information – as far as possible – for the THB Victim Monitor (see 

later in this Chapter). 
20 According to provisional STV data for 2006, there were 579 in that year. 
21 More of this information was available for 2005 than previously, for the first time. 
22 There is an indication below the tables as to whether they are based on secondary analyses of the data (‘files’) or 

the STV’s Annual Reports. 
23 The STV Annual Reports contain figures of 405 reports for 2003, and the secondary file analyses by BNRM 

(on a file updated by the STV) disclose a figure of 403 for the same year. In this section, the figure of 403 will be 
shown for the results of the secondary analyses and the figure of 405 where we fall back on the STV Annual 
Reports. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 48 

Table 3.1 shows the annual ranking order for the five most common countries of origin for 
victims.24 

Table 3.1 Major countries of origin of victims showing annual rankings 25 

Country 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

Brazil   5    

Bulgaria 1 1 1 2 2 1 

Czech Republic     5  

Netherlands 5 4  1 1 2 

Nigeria 4 2 3 4 3 3 

Romania  3 2 3 4 4 

Russian Federation 2 5  5  5 

Ukraine 3  4    

Source: STV (files). 

In 2004 and 2005, the Netherlands was the most common country of origin for victims of 
THB. Bulgaria fell to second place, with Nigeria and Romania changing places in positions 
three and four.26 

Table 3.2 shows the most common nationalities of the victims who were reported to the 
STV.27 Appendix 4 (Table B3.2) contains a full overview of all nationalities, in alphabetical 
order. 

Table 3.2 Most important countries of origin of (possible) victims registered with the STV, per annum 

Country 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

Angola 1 0% 3 1% 2 1% 2 0% 8 2% 16 1% 

Brazil 1 0% - - 12 5% 5 1% 8 2% 26 2% 

Bulgaria 40 14% 59 17% 48 19% 55 14% 52 12% 254 15% 

Cameroon 2 1% 10 3% 5 2% 11 3% 4 1% 32 2% 

China 10 4% 8 2% 8 3% 9 2% 5 1% 40 2% 

Czech Republic 8 3% 6 2% 3 1% 2 0% 18 4% 37 2% 

Hungary 4 1% 1 0% - - 3 1% 9 2% 17 1% 

Lithuania 10 4% 13 4% 9 4% 3 1% 3 1% 38 2% 

Moldova 9 3% 14 4% 1 0% 6 1% 2 0% 32 2% 

Morocco 1 0% 4 1% 2 1% 11 3% 11 3% 29 2% 

                                                                      
24 The most recent year determines the sequence in which the countries are mentioned in the table. 
25 Based on the nationality of (possible) victims. 
26 Provisional figures from the STV (up to August 2006) show that China is in the ascendant as a significant 

country of origin (STV Nieuws, 1, 2007) 
27 A nationality is included if at least 25 victims were of that nationality in the period from 2001 to 2005, or at least 

5 victims in 2005. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 49 

Country 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

Netherlands 11 4% 18 5% 11 4% 59 15% 98 23% 197 12% 

Nigeria 15 5% 45 13% 21 8% 39 10% 28 7% 148 9% 

Poland 4 1% 9 3% 3 1% 8 2% 13 3% 37 2% 

Romania 4 1% 22 6% 31 12% 45 11% 23 5% 125 7% 

Russian Federation 27 10% 16 5% 11 4% 14 3% 13 3% 81 5% 

Sierra Leone 6 2% 12 3% 11 4% 6 1% 14 3% 49 3% 

Slovakia 1 0% 2 1% 2 1% 3 1% 10 2% 18 1% 

Ukraine 18 6% 5 1% 14 5% 8 2% 10 2% 55 3% 

(former) Yugoslavia 3 1% - - 1 0% 2 0% 5 1% 11 1% 

Other 37 13% 75 22% 43 17% 96 24% 63 15% 314 18% 

Unknown 72 25% 21  6% 19  7% 16 4% 27 6% 155 9% 

Total 284 100% 343 100% 257 100% 403 100% 424 100% 1711 100% 

Source: STV (files). 

There was a marked increase in the number and proportion of Dutch national victims in 
2004 and 2005. The number and proportion of Bulgarian, Nigerian and Romanian victims 
was high, as in previous years. The number of Moroccan and Turkish victims increased. 

Table 3.3 shows the age allocation of the victims reported to the STV in the period from 2001 
to 2005. 

Table 3.3 Age distribution of victims reported to the STV, per annum 

Age category 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

10 - 14 years 2 1% - - 2 1% 3 1% 1 0% 8 0% 

15 - 17 years 25 9% 41 12% 18 7% 23 6% 23 5% 130 8% 

18 - 23 years 86 30% 130 38% 112 44% 165 41% 167 39% 660 39% 

24 - 30 years 39 14% 56 16% 54 21% 141 35% 150 35% 440 26% 

31 - 40 years 12 4% 19 6% 25 10% 61 15% 50 12% 167 10% 

41 years and older 1 0% 5 1% 5 2% - - 15 4% 26 2% 

Unknown 119 42% 92 27% 41 16% 12 3% 18 4% 282 16% 

Total 284 100% 343 100% 257 100% 405 100% 424 100% 1713 100% 

Source: STV (annual reports). 

As in previous years, most of the victims in 2004 and 2005 were in the age bracket from  
18 to 30. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 50 

The 424 new victims reported in 2005 included two men. They were both being exploited in 
prostitution. One man or boy was reported in 2004,28 and none in 2003. 

More detailed background information on victims 
Out of the 424 clients who were registered in 2005, it is known that at least: 
– 50 (12%) had children;29 
– 8 (2%) had a mental healthcare issue, 170 (40%) had none (unknown 246 - 58%); 
– 13 (3%) used drugs, 118 (28%) did not (unknown 293 - 69%); 
– 13 (3%) were pregnant, 80 (19%) were not (unknown 331 - 78%); 
– 8 (2%) were also victims of exploitation in sectors other than that of prostitution,30 167 

(39%) were not (unknown 249 - 59%); 
– 8 (2%) were also working in prostitution from home, 167 (39%) were not (unknown 249 - 

59%) (Source: STV files). 

The figures mentioned above must be considered to be a minimum, because of the signifi-
cant gaps in information. 

43 of the victims registered with the STV in 2005 took advantage of the period for reflection. 
The figure was also 43 in 2004. For both years, this represents about 13% of the foreign vic-
tims.31 

As in previous years, the police were by far the most significant reporters of victims in 2005, 
followed at some distance by the reception facilities. 

IND registration of victims on the B-9 regulation 
BNRM asks the IND each year how many (possible) victims and witnesses of THB are rely-
ing on the B-9 regulation and obtain a temporary residence permit on this basis. It has been 
decided to report on this issue, in the current report, from 2005 onwards. Where relevant, 
comparisons are drawn with the period for which reliable B-9 information is available: 1998 
to 2002.NRM3  

It is important to state that: 
– the information relates to victims of THB illegally residing in the Netherlands and who are 

cooperating or want to cooperate with the police and Public Prosecution Service; 
– occasionally, children of victims and children of witnesses are erroneously registered as B-

9 applicants;  
– not every B-9 application is dealt with in the year of application. 

                                                                      
28 Source: verbal information from the STV. 
29 Thirty clients had their children with them in the Netherlands; the children of 17 clients stayed in the country of 

origin; and for the others it was not known where their children were (Source: STV Annual Report 2005). 
30 In catering, housekeeping or as au pairs. 
31 326 of the victims in 2005 were not Dutch nationals, and the corresponding figure for 2004 was 344. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 51 

Reference is made to Appendix 2 for the research details and some additional comments.  

In 2005, the IND received 77 applications under the B-9 regulation.32 This figure was much 
lower than in 2001 and 2002, when there were 145 and 160 applications respectively. The 
figures in those years were admittedly much higher than in previous years. 
The IND issued 61 B-9 permits in 2005. The corresponding number for 2001 and 2002 was 
again higher, and in the years before that, lower. 
 

STV registration of B-9 applications 
The STV registered 60 B-9 applications for 2005, therefore fewer than the IND. Apparently not eve-
ryone who makes a B-9 application also reports to the STV, or perhaps the STV registration is incom-
plete on this point. 
STV does distinguish between victim applicants and witness applicants: 54 out of 60 applicants regis-
tered by the STV were victims (90%) and 6 were witnesses (10%). These proportions were almost 
identical in the previous year.33 

Information from the IND, which has not been analysed in any greater detail, indicates that 
the number of B-9 applications and awards was much higher in 2006. The figures for 2006 
were 180 B-9 applications and 150 permits. 

Table 3.4 shows the age allocation of victims/witnesses applying for/obtaining a B-9 permit 
in 2005. 

Table 3.4 Age distribution of persons with a B-9 permit (application), 2005 

Age category Application Permit granted 

 N % N % 

0 - 10 years 2 3% 0 - 

11 - 17 years 5 7% 5 8% 

18 - 25 years 36 47% 29 48% 

26 -30 years 22 29% 18 30% 

31 - 40 years 10 13% 8 13% 

41 years and older 2 3% 1 2% 

Total 77 100% 61 100% 

Almost half of the individuals who applied for or were granted a B-9 permit were between 
the ages of 18 and 26. Nearly one third of them were in the age range between 26 and 30. The 
applicants included seven minors. The two youngest children were probably the children of 
victims. This was not the case, however, for the five children in the age bracket between 12 
and 18. They had their own files and were not associated with other individuals. 

                                                                      
32 Of the 77 applicants, 22 had already made contact with the IND, for example in relation to an asylum 

application. 
33 The STV records indicate that 89% of applicants were victims and 11% were witnesses in 2004. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 52 

Virtually all of the B-9 applicants in 2005 were female. The 77 applicants included 3 males 
(4%). One of these ‘males’ was 7 years old and probably the child of a victim (see above). The 
percentage of male applicants was also low in 2002 and earlier years.34 
98% of those who actually attained a B-9 residence permit were female and 2% were male.35 

Table 3.5 contains an overview of the most common nationalities of victims and witnesses 
holding (or applying for) a B-9 permit.36 A table specifying all nationalities is included in 
Appendix 4 (Table B3.5). 

Table 3.5 Nationality of persons with a B-9 permit (application), 2005 

Nationality Application Permit granted 

 N % N % 

Bulgarian 12 16% 11 18% 

Sierra Leonese 7 9% 8 37 13% 

Romanian 6 8% 6 10% 

Nigerian 6 8% 4 7% 

Russian 5 7% 5 8% 

Other 39 51% 26 43% 

Unknown38 2 3% 1 2% 

Total 77 100% 61 100% 

In 2005, one in six of the victims/witnesses of THB applying for a B-9 residence permit were 
Bulgarian nationals. This means that – just as in 2002 and earlier years – Bulgaria topped the 
list of countries of origin for victims and witnesses ‘in the B-9’. Sierra Leone took second 
place in 2005, followed by Romania, Nigeria and the Russian Federation.  

Table 3.6 shows an allocation of the victims/witnesses applying for or holding a B-9 accord-
ing to region of origin. It also draws a distinction within Europe – where many victims come 
from – between those countries who were members of the EU in 1995,39 countries that be-
came members of the EU in 2004 or who were candidate members at that point and became 
members in 2007,40 non-EU countries in Eastern Europe41 and non-EU countries in West-
ern Europe.42 Continents are also distinguished.43 

                                                                      
34 Percentage of males each year: 8% (1998), 16% (1999), 1% (2000), 4% (2001) and 7% (2002). 
35 61 women and one man. Percentage of males in earlier years: 2% (1998), 6% (1999), 2% (2000), 3% (2001) and 

3% (2002). 
36 A nationality is included in the table if 5 or more of the victims/witnesses have the nationality in question. 
37  It may appear strange that more B-9 permits were granted to than applied for by victims/witnesses of Sierra 

Leonese nationality. However, this is possible because not all applications are dealt with within the same year. 
38 It probably concerns persons who arrived in the Netherlands as undocumented asylum seekers and whose na-

tionality was later established. 
39 Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Denmark, the Republic of Ireland, the United 

Kingdom, Greece, Portugal, Spain, Finland, Austria, Sweden. 
40 Cyprus, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovenia, Slovakia, the Czech Republic, Bulgaria 

and Romania. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 53 

Table 3.6 Region of origin of persons with a B-9 permit (application), 2005 

Region of origin Application Permit granted 

 N % N % 

EU: 1995 2 3% 2 3% 

EU: new member/accession states 2004 26 34% 26 43% 

Eastern Europe, non-EU member states 15 20% 10 16% 

Western Europe, non-EU member states 1 1% 1 2% 

Africa 19 25% 17 28% 

Latin America / Caribbean 4 5% 1 2% 

Asia 8 10% 3 5% 

Unknown 2 3% 1 2% 

Total 77 100% 61 100% 

The majority of the victims and witnesses who applied for a B-9 residence permit or were is-
sued with one, came from countries that had joined the EU in 2004 and 2007, Africa and 
non-EU countries in Eastern Europe. 

The police report victims and witnesses of THB, who are eligible for a temporary residence 
permit based on the B-9 regulation, to the IND. The IND issues the residence permits.  

Many victims and witnesses wish to stay in the Netherlands after the B-9 permit has ex-
pired.NRM3 The IND has manually recorded for just over a year, how many victims/witnesses 
submitted an application for continued residence, and how many of these applications are 
granted. In 2006, the IND noted 34 applications for continued residence, with equal num-
bers being approved and rejected (17 and 17) at first instance.44 

3.3 Facilities available to victims 

3.3.1 General developments and facilities 

Reporting a criminal offence 
The third BNRM Report commented that it was not always easy for victims of trafficking to 
report the criminal offence. One of the recommendations in that report, therefore, was that 
victims of THB should be offered a clear opportunity to do so as quickly as possible. The Na-
tional Ombudsman has now confirmed that investigation officials are obliged in principle to 

                                                                      
41 The Russian Federation, Moldavia, Ukraine, Belarus, Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Serbia, Macedonia, 

Croatia, Montenegro, Kazakhstan, Turkey, Kyrgyzstan. 
42 Switzerland, Norway, Iceland, the Isle of Man, the Faroe Islands, Andorra, Gibraltar, the Vatican City, San 

Marino, Lichtenstein, Monaco. 
43 Only included in the table if individuals applying for or holding a B-9 come from there. 
44 Source: verbal information from the IND. We do not know how many victims made an objection, or the results 

of any such objections. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 54 

register any reports of a criminal offence in terms of Article 163 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure. Only one exception to this general rule is available, according to the Ombuds-
man, namely if it can be established in advance, without any further investigation and with-
out a shadow of doubt, that the conduct which is the subject of the report does not amount 
to an offence. The general rule that a report of a criminal offence must be registered even 
applies in cases where there might then be a suspicion that the person wanting to report the 
crime is primarily concerned with the consequences of the report in terms of residency 
status. The National Ombudsman has indicated that neither investigation into the reliability 
of the individual wishing to report the crime, nor any assessment of whether sufficient evi-
dence can be gathered, should play any part at that stage.45 

Improvements in the application of the B-9 regulation 
We indicated, in Chapter 2, that improvements were required not only in the B-9 regulation 
but also in its application. This requires input from all parties involved in the implementa-
tion of the B-9 regulation and constant attention to the dissemination of knowledge about 
the regulation. 
 

B-9 conference and adjustments to application of the B-9 regulation 
Following up on a promise during the general consultation on THB on 18 January 2003, the Minister 
for Immigration & Integration, in conjunction with the IND, STV and BNRM, organised the working 
conference entitled Uitvoering B9-regeling [B-9 regulation Implementation].46 The aim of this confer-
ence was to achieve improved implementation of the regulation, without the need for any adjustment 
to the regulation itself. The meeting resulted in a range of concrete actions: 
- a broadly-composed editorial board was set up to arrange for the dissemination of current and clear 

information on the regulation; 
- the foundations were laid for the ‘Safety File’, an initiative to assist victims of THB to collect facts and 

circumstances that might be relevant in connection with the assessment of their applications for con-
tinued residence after the B-9; 

- in response to the conference, the Legal Aid Board [Raad voor de Rechtsbijstand] extended the number 
of hours of legal assistance that could be obtained by a victim of THB for assistance in the proceed-
ings; 

- the Ministry of Foreign Affairs prepared thematic official notices on THB for a number of coun-
tries;47 

- the conference resulted in a structural consultation between the chain partners on the implementa-
tion of the B-9 regulation and associated matters – the STV Platform. 

                                                                      
45 Report 2006/0279 dated 10 August 2006. 
46 Conference held on 17-18 June 2004 in The Hague. 
47 These official notices, currently available for Romania, the Russian Federation, Bulgaria and the Ukraine, 

contain a description of the approach to THB, reception of and support for victims and the way in which 
prostitution is regarded in the countries in question. The general official notice for Nigeria also dealt with these 
subjects. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 55 

In the STV Platform, a large number of chain partners exchange information on bottlenecks 
in the implementation of the B-9 regulation on a regular basis. The broad composition of 
this consultative body generally allows for a solution to be achieved smoothly, even though 
some of the bottlenecks are obstinate ones. For example, in certain regions it still happens 
that victims (and their lawyers) are not informed by the Public Prosecution Service about the 
progress of ‘their’ criminal case,48 it often takes a long time for B-9 passes to be issued, and 
municipalities have adopted divergent policies in relation to victims being allowed to 
work.49 The moment when the B-9 regulation is offered remains another obstinate bottle-
neck. 
 

The moment when the B-9 regulation is offered 
In current practice it is unclear exactly when a (possible) victim should be made aware of the existence 
of the B-9 regulation. This is of primary significance when detention of a foreign national is being con-
sidered because of illegal residence. According to the regulation, the police ought to inform the foreign 
national about the possibility of reporting the crime of THB as soon as there is the slightest indication of 
this crime. This wording leaves little scope for interpretation about the time when the B-9 should be 
offered to a possible victim (or witness) of THB. The Council of State held that the fact ‘that it was 
known at the time of taking into (aliens’) detention […] that the appellant was encountered in the con-
text of an investigation into THB and people smuggling […] does not detract from the legitimacy of 
the measure [aliens’ detention] since a foreign national may also be detained in such circumstances.’ 
The Council of State held that, because the conditions for taking the individual into aliens’ detention 
for the purpose of deportation were met, this was enough to render such a detention legitimate, 
whether the foreign national was a (possible) victim of THB or not.50 
This opinion from the Council of State is difficult to reconcile with the text – and even more so with 
the spirit – of the B-9 regulation. Through the B-9 regulation, the Dutch government is in part imple-
menting the provisions for the benefit of victims of THB as contained in the Palermo Protocol (Article 
6). There is no doubt in the B-9 regulation about the point when the reflection period should be of-
fered. Nor does the regulation leave much scope on the way in which this reflection period should be 
used: ‘the reflection period is intended for reflecting on a decision to report the crime in complete 
peace’. Staying in a detention facility is not particularly conducive to this. The prime consideration is 
that victims of THB need protection by the government, and this should not be limited to just being a 
paper exercise. 

Victims of THB in aliens’ detention 
In 2003, BLinN initiated a study into (female) victims of THB in aliens’ detention. Victims of 
THB who do not leave the Netherlands voluntarily, sometimes end up in aliens’ detention. It 
is not known exactly how often this happens, but STV and BLinN were aware of 16 cases of 
(suspected) victims of THB in aliens’ detention in 2003 and 2004. These cases were studied 

                                                                      
48 This is in conflict with the Victim Care Instruction [Aanwijzing Slachtofferzorg] (dated 1 June 2004). 
49 It is a pity that the Association of Dutch Municipalities (VNG) does not take part in the consultation. 
50  Council of State, Administrative Judiciary Division, 30 June 2006. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 56 

in the context of the BLinN research. There was also a study of the literature, 26 interviews 
were held51 and a round-table meeting was organised in relation to the results. 
 

Findings of the investigation into female victims of THB in aliens’ detention 
Bottlenecks that were identified: 
- failure to recognise victims of THB in the phase prior to aliens’ detention; 
- victims in the asylum procedure run the risk of not being believed if they do not quickly tell their tale 

about being victims of THB; 
- failure to recognise victims of THB during aliens’ detention; knowledge and experience are lost be-

cause of the frequent changes of location and staff. The employees of the private security companies 
used for supervision are not aware of the position of foreign nationals in detention and are unable to 
identify THB; 

- problems with legal assistance from duty lawyers. Action has since been taken towards improving 
this area; 

- voluntary repatriation is difficult from aliens’ detention, making it difficult to return via IOM and to 
obtain the IOM living allowance; 

- communication between the Aliens Police, IND and the detention centre officials dealing with repa-
triation52 is not always what it should be. Sometimes the wheels can be set in motion for returning 
someone in conjunction with an outside organisation and the possible victims are unexpectedly re-
leased, and then they disappear from the view of the social services; 

- the recording of victims of THB is only sporadic, and the various (recording) systems are incompati-
ble; 

- the organisations involved are not sufficiently aware of the existing support that is available. 
 
Recommendations: 
- in a broad sense, priority and attention for identifying victims of THB; 
- training and additional education of duty lawyers as regards identification of THB, and knowledge of 

the B-9 regulation; 
- concentrate the expertise by bringing female foreign nationals together at a set location with expert 

staff, rather than having them mixed in with other detainees under the criminal law;53 
- voluntary repatriation, including support from IOM, has to be possible; 
- institutions should have a duty to report on the presence of victims of THB, and on what has hap-

pened to them. 

There have now been improvements in identifying victims of THB in aliens’ detention, and 
more attention is being paid to this group. In 2006, the Ministry of Justice initiated several 
consultations with representatives from the police, IND, STV, IOM and BLinN, looking for 

                                                                      
51 With the police, IND, the Judicial Institutions Policy Service, Legal Aid, outside organisations and a single THB 

victim. 
52 The officials dealing with returns explain the procedures, provide information, make practical arrangements, 

act as conduits for the IND and the Aliens Police and try to persuade foreign nationals to return to their 
countries of origin. 

53 A very limited initial straw poll among penal institutions clearly showed that their populations were actually 
quite likely to include victims of THB, albeit not regularly. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 57 

solutions to bottlenecks in the area of identifying and supporting these (possible) victims.54 
BLinN had contacts with 43 victims (or possible victims) – 40 females and 3 males – in aliens’ 
detention in 2006, of whom 14 officially reported the offence to the police and ended up on 
the B-9 regulation. 

Quality of legal aid given to foreign nationals in aliens’ detention facilities 
Complaints about the quality of legal aid given to foreign nationals in aliens' detention led to 
the Legal Aid Boards setting up a national investigation into the subject. 
 

Quality of legal aid given to foreign nationals in aliens’ detention facilities, an investigation 
The researchers Jacobs, Bruinsma and Van Haaf (2006), reported that by no means all of the foreign 
nationals appeared to have had a visit from a lawyer at the first stage. During the detention phase 
communication between the foreign national and the lawyer is generally in writing; it seems that pro-
viders of legal aid seldom visit detention facilities. It is not at all unusual for there to be no lawyer pre-
sent at hearings, certainly if there are continued pleas. Those who actually do attend are not always ex-
pert. Estimates from the Aliens Courts indicate that the number of ‘poor performers’ ranges between 
0-25%, with a core at around 10%-20%. The group of outstanding lawyers (with sound knowledge of 
relevant and recent case law) is about the same size. While the research was not dealing with victims of 
THB, these were among the foreign nationals in aliens’ detention, and the recommendations also ap-
ply to legal aid for them. The researchers recommend that the Legal Aid Board should take a more 
proactive and stricter stance on these points. The remuneration of legal aid providers should depend 
on their appearance at the hearing and their visits to the client, and they should undertake follow-up 
courses on the law relating to aliens’ detention every so often. In light of the possibility of encountering 
victims of THB, this should also include training and instruction in the areas of identifying THB and 
knowledge of the B-9 regulation (see the above-mentioned recommendations from BLinN). The re-
searchers concluded with a recommendation to introduce consultation facilities for foreign nationals 
in aliens’detention. 
 
Proposed measures 
- with effect from 2007, the Boards will be imposing higher and uniform expertise requirements to 

lawyers, for example as regards periodical follow-up courses; 
- the question of whether it is possible to develop internal monitoring and intra-professional testing 

will be looked into; 
- work will be undertaken on consultation facilities and a complaints scheme; 
- the Boards will investigate how to introduce better incentives into the payment structure for appear-

ances at the first plea hearing. 

Legal Aid for victims of THB 
Social workers and lawyers have an important part to play in providing legal assistance for 
(possible) victims of THB, irrespective of the sector in which the exploitation took place. 
They must be in a position to explain to the possible victims their rights and possibilities and 

                                                                      
54 Thus arrangements were made to train the Return Organisation [Terugkeerorganisatie], the division of the 

Ministry of Justice responsible for immigrants in aliens’ detention. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 58 

to ensure that those individuals who are eligible actually end up on the B-9 path and can 
make use of the associated facilities. 
During 2005 and 2006, the STV was active in training care coordinators and staff in recep-
tion centres on the B-9 regulation and on the legal process applicable to victims. Informa-
tion on the B-9 can be found on the STV website55 and on a site specific to the B-9 regula-
tion.56 The regional support networks use the Victim Support Bureau [Bureau Slachtoffer-
hulp] or specialist lawyers to provide legal support for (foreign) victims. This works well, but 
there are not many specialist lawyers, and one of the problems is that they are generally un-
der considerable time pressure. Attempts are being made to circumvent this in Utrecht, Am-
sterdam, The Hague and occasionally elsewhere by working (in collaboration with BLinN) 
with voluntary legal support. 
The post-graduate legal studies Institute OSR arranged courses on legal assistance for vic-
tims of THB in 2005, 2006 and 2007. The care coordinators were made aware of which law-
yers in their region had taken the course (STV Annual Report, 2005; STV Working Plan, 2006). 

Compensation possibilities for victims 
There are various ways in which victims of THB can obtain compensation. This may involve 
tangible losses – for example property, medical costs or loss of income – and intangible 
losses, for example damages for pain and suffering. 
– victims can join a claim for civil damages, as adversely affected parties, in the criminal procedure  
The victim’s civil claim is then dealt with at the same time as the criminal case. The benefit of 
this, as opposed to proceedings before the civil court, is that it is easier to submit the claim.  
 

Procedure to join the criminal proceedings as an adversely affected party  
A summons must have been issued to a suspect before a motion for joinder of a party can be submitted 
in the proceedings. The public prosecutor then asks the court, during the criminal proceedings, to de-
cide on the award of compensation. The victim does not therefore need to initiate any separate pro-
ceedings, and there are no costs for the victim in relation to this joinder procedure. The claim, which is 
based on civil law, can be lodged by anyone who has directly sustained loss as a result of a criminal of-
fence. When awarding compensation, the court must bear in mind whatever facts have been found 
proven in the case.  

In order to join the criminal proceedings, the victim must provide details, on a ‘motion for 
joinder of parties’ form, concerning the loss that has been sustained and – with some sub-
stantiation – the amount that is involved.58 The victim has to establish the likelihood of loss 
rather than prove it. The victim does not need to turn up at the hearing, although this can be 

                                                                      
55 www.fo-stvkennisnet.nl. 
56 www.B9-regeling.nl. 
57 The other conditions are: the victim has sustained loss as a result of a criminal offence; the loss or part of it has 

not been compensated in any other way; and the suspect must be summoned for the offence from which the 
loss arose. The loss need not be specified in the criminal charge.  

58 The victim can also submit his or her claim verbally at the hearing, right up until the prosecutor holds his or her 
closing speech. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 59 

desirable, for example to provide an explanation if the claim is unclear. If the suspect is ac-
quitted then the claim is rejected. The claim will also be rejected if it is clearly unfounded. If 
the claim is ‘apparently not straightforward’, then the claim may be declared inadmissible, 
with a rider that the victim can lodge the claim with the civil courts. The criminal court can 
also award part of the claim and declare the balance to be inadmissible. If either the accused 
or the public prosecutor submits an appeal, then, by law, the addition of the disadvantaged 
party continues through the appeal. If the suspect is convicted but the claim is rejected, then 
the disadvantaged party cannot subsequently resort to the civil courts with the same claim. 
An independent appeal against rejection of the claim is, however, possible.  
If the criminal court has awarded part or all of the disadvantaged party's claim, then that 
party acquires a title for execution once the options for appealing the judgment have been 
exhausted. The disadvantaged party can approach the convicted party directly for payment. 
Forcible execution occurs in the same way as for judgments from the civil courts: the credi-
tor passes the judgment to a bailiff who serves the judgment on the convicted party and is-
sues a demand for payment. If payment is not made, then the bailiff can impose an attach-
ment on property belonging to the convicted party, which is then liquidated. The execution 
of the judgment requires no personal contact between the victim and perpetrator. The bail-
iff's costs can be recovered from the perpetrator. 
– the compensation order  
In addition to awarding the civil claim, the court can (also) impose an order for compensa-
tion.59 The victim can ask for such a sanction, but it can also be imposed ex proprio motu. The 
most important distinction between this and a claim as a disadvantaged party is that collect-
ing the claim is taken out of the victim’s hands and passed to the Central Judicial Collection 
Agency. As with a civil claim, the amount involved must be established as a loss in terms of 
civil law. When imposing a sanction of compensation, the court specifies an alternative pe-
riod of detention in the event that the claim is not paid and recovered in full, which puts ex-
tra pressure on the convicted party to pay up. The convicted party is not, however, relieved 
of his obligation to pay the victim just because he sits out the alternative period of detention. 
These are the reasons why victims may prefer compensation sanctions. In fact, usually when 
a civil claim is awarded, an order for restitution is imposed for the same amount of loss, even 
if it is not asked for by the disadvantaged party and is not demanded by the public prosecutor. 
– when passing a suspended sentence, a court can impose a special condition to the effect that the ac-

cused should pay a specific amount to the victim 
Not much use has been made of this facility since the compensation sanction was intro-
duced. There is no need for the victim to have joined the criminal proceedings as a disadvan-
taged party before any such special condition can be imposed. 
When passing sentence, the court can impose a special condition of payment of a sum to the 
Violent Offences Compensation Fund [Schadefonds Geweldsmisdrijven] or some other insti-

                                                                      
59 The procedure of joining a claim is a civil procedure embedded in the criminal proceedings, while the 

compensation order is a sanction. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 60 

tution protecting the interests of victims of criminal offences. This condition is primarily of 
interest if there is no demonstrable victim, or if a victim does not wish to obtain compensation. 
– victims can obtain a benefit payment from the Violent Offences Compensation Fund 
The Fund can pay out benefits to anyone who has sustained serious physical or mental in-
jury as a result of an intentional violent offence committed in the Netherlands. This fund 
cannot reimburse losses resulting from lost income. In order to obtain a payment, it is neces-
sary to lodge an application for a benefit payment with the Fund. The committee deciding 
on applications can call for further information and can also interview witnesses and ex-
perts. A claim can be awarded or rejected either in whole or in part. If it is rejected, then the 
disadvantaged party can lodge an appeal to the Court of Appeal in The Hague. The Com-
pensation Fund has maximum benefit payment amounts, and can make supplementary 
payments. It makes no difference to the Compensation Fund whether the victim is a Dutch 
national. The offence must have been committed on Dutch territory, however. Very few 
foreign victims actually find their way to the Fund each year. The European Commission 
wants it to be possible for victims to submit a claim from their own EU country to the com-
pensation fund in another country, if the losses were sustained in that other country. A Di-
rective to this effect came into operation on 1 January 2006.60 Most foreign victims of THB 
come from countries outside the EU, however. 
– loss mediation 
Loss mediators have been appointed within the police and all of the local public prosecutors’ 
offices, who can try to organise a compensation arrangement between the victim and the 
suspect. In light of the nature of the offence, however, a scheme such as this does not appear 
to be entirely appropriate in the case of THB. 
– victims can resort to the civil courts 
A conviction in a criminal case provides important evidence at the civil court: the victim can 
exhibit the criminal conviction. If the conviction has not yet become irrevocable, or if it 
ended in acquittal or dismissal, it still does not prevent a claim for compensation being 
lodged with the civil court. The court may, nevertheless, decide to await the criminal verdict. 
One disadvantage is that this civil law route is complicated and can take longer. Victims of 
cross-border THB, in particular, may already have left for their countries of origin. 
 

How is a victim made aware of the facilities for compensation? 
When victims of THB encounter the police, then, in accordance with the Framework Decision on the 
status of the victim in criminal proceedings (OJ 2001, L 82/161), the police must, amongst other matters, in-
form the victim of the opportunities for legal advice, compensation from the perpetrator or any gov-
ernment indemnity payment. The police usually refer victims to the Victim Support Bureau [Bureau 
Slachtofferhulp] for practical help, where victims can obtain assistance free of charge. Legal advice is 

                                                                      
60 Directive on compensation in connection with the victims of crime, 29 April 2004 (2004/80/EC), OJ 2004,  

L 261/15 
61 EU Framework Decision on the status of the victim in criminal proceedings, 15 March 2001 (2001/220/JBZ), OJ 

2001, L 82/1. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 61 

provided via the Legal Counters [Juridische Loketten] (the former Legal Aid Bureaus). The Victim Care 
Instruction [Aanwijzing Slachtofferzorg] prescribes that, when noting a report of a crime, the police 
should find out whether the victim has suffered any losses as a result of the offence, and if so what 
these losses are. The victim's report is noted in an appendix to the official report.  

The integral approach to THB by the chain partners 
Many parties are involved in combating THB. Cooperation is increasingly viewed as indis-
pensable for dealing with the phenomenon effectively. This applies to repressive measures 
but also to victim support. This was what led the STV to initiate the regional assistance net-
works.NRM1/NRM3 These (15) networks are supervised by a care coordinator or by the STV, 
and operate with collaborative agreements. These are protocols spelling out the purpose of 
the network and the contributions made by the various parties, and they are also signed by 
the different partners. Inspired by positive experiences in the context of juvenile prostitution 
policy, the STV has started a project for a ‘chain partners approach to THB’. The aim is to 
make cooperation more formal, more transparent and more focused on results. 
STV invited municipalities and the networks to make the necessary quality improvements 
themselves and for this purpose provided a helping hand in the form of a report entitled 
‘Chain partners approach to Trafficking in Human Beings’ [Ketenaanpak tegen mensenhan-
del]. The report is based on the results of national meetings with support staff, care coordi-
nators and chain partners, during which bottlenecks and solutions were explored, and also 
on a pilot study which took place in Amsterdam. 
 

Chain partners approach to Trafficking in Human Beings  
The STV report contains practical points for attention, such as: 
- the importance of a shared perception on bottlenecks, and how this can be achieved; 
- the different target groups the partners may have in mind. It is important to be clear about what the 

target group is and what aims are being sought; 
- the different methods for making collaborative agreements within a chain of cooperating partner or-

ganisations; 
- a summary of points for attention in the context of proper assistance for victims, including simple 

explanations, satisfactory signalling, a single coordinator for each victim, a single client file, one 
physical ‘office window’ for clients and chain partners, and an adequate number of reception places; 

- the importance of satisfactory allocation of tasks, and a clear understanding of how everyone con-
tributes added value. 

(Source: STV, 2006). 

Reception facilities 
In its 2005 Annual Report, STV stated that it would always succeed in finding a place for a 
victim in a shelter within 24 hours, albeit sometimes with difficulty. The problems were 
principally the conditions and limitations imposed by the shelter or accommodation centre, 
and also the preference of the police for finding a place not too far from the police district in 
question. STV experienced an increase in the number of requests for shelter in the first half 
of 2006, however, and it became more difficult to find suitable accommodation in such shel-



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 62 

ters. In practice, when they are looking for accommodation, victims often have to tell their 
story over the phone, sometimes several times; a practice that is in fact also normal in rela-
tion to sheltering victims of domestic violence, for example. 
The B-9 regulation, including the right to housing and assistance, also now applies to victims 
of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. There is not much experience yet with 
this, and there are few places available for male victims.  

Reception and safety  
Victims of THB form an awkward target group.62 At the shelter facilities there is often, for 
instance, a fear of the criminal networks behind the victims.NRM3 With respect to sheltering 
women, a research into safety risks and possibilities for safe houses for seriously threatened 
women revealed that woman involved in prostitution and THB are considered to be among 
those most seriously threatened. When these women are taken into shelter, it is crucially 
important to assess the safety risks to themselves, any children they may have and also the 
shelter workers. Lünnemann et al. (2006) observed that this is not easy, and that there is no 
suitable form of shelter in existence for women who need not only safety but also a lot of as-
sistance. 
The newest facilities for women's shelter are the safe houses.63 They are only available on a 
temporary basis, however, and only for a very limited group of women, namely those with a 
certain degree of independence who can cope with an isolated existence. 
In fact, safety is an important topic in connection with shelter for women in general,64 as 
well as in connection with shelter for male victims, whose numbers are growing,65 and for 
whom there is no secure shelter available (STV Annual Report 2005). 

Category-based or integral shelter? 
BNRM recommended obtaining an analysis from the shelter centres of the advantages and 
disadvantages of category-based as opposed to integral shelter for victims of THB, and for 
them to make a proposal on this matter.NRM3 Opinions are divided on the question of 
whether specific expertise is necessary to work with this target group. There is ongoing con-
sultation between the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Public Health, Welfare & Sport 

                                                                      
62 As examples of bottlenecks in helping victims of THB, Knaapen (2006) mentions language obstacles, cultural 

differences, absence of any future prospects and a lack of confidence in those providing assistance. Victims 
disappear from shelter quite frequently, and then return to the traffickers. Knaapen points out that many 
victims of THB are seriously traumatised, requiring specialist care. See also Zimmerman et al. (2006) on this. 

63 These are addresses where women can stay if the police feel that they are in a life-threatening situation. The 
police offer protection via an alarm system and extra, strictly enforced measures are in place to ensure 
anonymity. Three women's shelter institutions in the Netherlands have been administering (since 2003 or 
2004) – a total of eight houses with places for 11 women and their children. These had been occupied by about 
42 women up to the summer of 2005; Lünnemann et al (2006) do not state whether these included victims of 
THB, or how many. 

64 A research into supply and demand within women's shelter, for which 218 female clients were interviewed, 
including just 6 victims of THB, showed that 70% of the women wanted help with their safety and 88% 
obtained assistance in this area (Wolf et al., 2006). 

65 22 male victims of THB were reported to the STV in 2006 (STV Nieuws, 1, 2007). 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 63 

and other chain partners concerning shelter for victims of THB. One of the options being 
discussed is a (category-based) reception path before the actual B-9 regulation. This would 
make it possible to establish the type of care and support required by the victim, and also 
which type of reception66 he or she needs, and it would also be possible to work on ‘cutting 
the victim loose’ from the exploiter, where necessary. 

The Safety File and continued residence 
Even after the most recent amendment to the B-9 regulation, there are still foreign national 
victims of THB who do not obtain a permit for continued residence based on the results of 
the criminal proceedings (see Chapter 2), but who do not want to go back to their countries 
of origin. After the B-9 regulation expires, they can submit an application for continued 
residence on humanitarian grounds. The IND assesses the application, taking account of the 
risk of reprisals and opportunities for reintegration. It is not easy to substantiate this type of 
application, because in practice the burden of proof is largely imposed on the victim. The 
various institutions (often many of them) that the victim will have been involved with during 
his or her stay in the Netherlands may have all sorts of relevant information in this context. 
The victim and his or her lawyer must be able to get hold of this information for the applica-
tion for continued residence. In 2005, the STV and a range of cooperating partners devel-
oped a Checklist for Continued Residence in Human Trafficking Cases.  
 

Points for attention in the Checklist for Continued Residence 
The Checklist for Continued Residence contains items on: 
- the criminal procedure (covering reporting a criminal offence, investigation, prosecution and sen-

tencing of the accused(s), financial compensation and missing passports); 
- health care and medical treatment (for injuries etc); 
- reception and assistance; 
- safety measures; 
- the position of any children; 
- the situation in the country of origin. 

The Monitor Trafficking in Human Beings on the position of victims  
It continues to be difficult to obtain a clear picture of the position of victims of THB. A vic-
tim monitor has been developed on the instructions of the WODC in order to enable a peri-
odical assessment of the position of victims of exploitation in the sex industry in the Nether-
lands. The monitor is measuring the position of victims from 7 angles, namely: 1. identifying 
them; 2. access to and use of the B-9 regulation; 3. legal aid/criminal proceedings; 4. recep-
tion/accommodation; 5. healthcare; 6. income, employment and education; and 7. repatria-
tion and continued residence. The monitor consists of a total of 33 indicators. 

                                                                      
66 Temporary category-based shelter might also be able to prevent stagnation in reception throughput (Knaapen, 

2006). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 64 

Three sources of information are being used to collect information, namely existing record 
systems, questionnaires addressed to key figures and victims, and an analysis of case law 
(Van Vianen et al., 2006). The collection of data was ongoing at the time when this report 
was being written. 

3.3.2 Specific assistance bodies and initiatives 

BLinN 
BLinN has set up or continued a range of projects for victims of THB in the recent past. 
– ‘Buddy’ projects have been set up in various cities and towns. These are aimed at friendly 

contact between a volunteer and a victim of THB. BLinN can also mediate for individual 
women elsewhere than in these cities, or set up this type of project in a new area. A na-
tional information and cultural festival is organised each year for the women and their 
buddies. 

– BLinN assists support groups for victims of THB. The aim is to create a safe environment 
(with professional psycho-social support) where people who share similar experiences 
can discuss relevant topics. The groups focus on empowerment of the participants. Indi-
vidual support is provided in specific cases. 

– Training courses are also developed in the area of social and communicative skills, as well 
as outdoor training courses designed to apply the experience gained in the support groups 
in a different environment. 

– BLinN also has an emergency fund, whereby victims of human trafficking can, in specific 
cases and subject to certain conditions, apply for support in the form of a loan or a gift. In 
2006 a total of 75 clients received financial support, with almost three quarters of these re-
ceiving help in the form of a loan. Only 36% of them paid the loan back, which gave BLinN 
reason to redefine its policy on allocating such loans.  

– BLinN is also actively involved in (improving) the provision of information to victims, 
partly by developing bilingual folders, and in organising thematic courses on subjects such 
as rights in the Netherlands, bringing up families, budgeting, sexuality, Dutch culture and 
society, health and repatriation. 

– BLinN can act as a mediator for finding courses, education or (voluntary) work.  
– BLinN, along with IOM, La Strada, STV and SRTV, is a member of the Repatriation & Re-

integration Covenant (see later in this Chapter). 
– BLinN is actively involved with (female) victims of THB in aliens’ detention (see 3.3.1). 

BLinN supported a total of 172 victims in 2005 and 223 in 2006. The figures for 2005 in-
cluded 1 man and those for 2006 included 9 men. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 65 

The International Organisation for Migration (IOM) 
Under the REAN programme67 IOM offers support to victims of THB who want to return to 
their country of origin. The programme applies to individuals who are not nationals of EU 
countries. An exception is made, however, for victims of THB, so that even victims from the 
countries that joined the EU on 1 May 2004 can benefit from the programme.68 The support 
may consist of a flight ticket and a subsistence allowance. IOM can also offer individual me-
diation, depending on the actual demand for assistance and the provisions in the country of 
origin, for example for temporary reception and assistance towards reintegration in the 
country of origin.NRM3 
Within the framework of the Randstad Return Initiative II (RRI II), IOM has appointed native 
counsellors in the four major cities in the Netherlands to assist with the voluntary repatria-
tion of undocumented migrants and asylum seekers who have exhausted all available legal 
remedies. Organisations who assist the client during his or her repatriation project can ob-
tain a contribution towards their costs for doing so (Infosheet RRI II, IOM). 
IOM has been implementing the Assisted Voluntary Return and Reintegration Programme for 
Irregular Vulnerable Nigerian Nationals in Ireland and The Netherlands since 1 September 2006. 
The aim of this Nigeria Project for Return of Vulnerable Migrants is to facilitate the voluntary 
return and reintegration of vulnerable Nigerians (such as unaccompanied underage asylum 
seekers, or former ones, people with medical problems, single parents and victims of THB) 
from the Netherlands and Ireland. It is possible to offer customised advice in the context of 
this project for social reintegration and economic independence. Another key point is the 
setting up of a permanent structure to keep track of the individuals who have returned 
(through local non-governmental organisations in Ireland, the Netherlands and Nigeria) and 
also capacity building within the Nigerian NGOs. 

La Strada International 
More than a hundred people work in the nine current La Strada partner countries.69 The 
Annual Report 200570 contains detailed information on the activities of La Strada, which are 
embedded in three campaigns under the umbrella heading of ‘Prevention of trafficking in 
human beings in Central and Eastern Europe’; these are Information & Lobby, Prevention 
and Education and Social Assistance (‘safe return and social inclusion’). The figures shown 
in the Annual Report give some idea of the considerable impact made by La Strada.  

Repatriation and Reintegration Covenant 
IOM, BLinN, SRTVNRM3, La Strada and the STV have made arrangements, set out in a 
Covenant, to optimise assistance for victims of THB who are returning to their countries of 
origin. The partners in the Covenant consult regularly on help and support for returning 

                                                                      
67 REAN stands for Return and Emigration of Aliens from the Netherlands. 
68 It may be assumed that the same applies to victims from countries that joined at a later date. 
69 These are Poland, the Czech Republic, Ukraine, Bulgaria, Belarus, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Moldavia, Macedonia 

and the Netherlands, where the head office of La Strada International is based. 
70 See www.lastradainternational.org. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 66 

people to their countries of origin. This can involve consideration of matters such as recep-
tion, accommodation, education, social services and finding employment. 
The partners in the Covenant also apply themselves to the opportunities for supplying the 
information needed for the Safety File. 

The Integral Chain Partners Approach to Prostitution and Trafficking in Human Beings in Am-
sterdam 
In order to improve information, advice and assistance for prostitutes, and to redress the 
shortage of care, reception and support facilities for victims of THB,71 as well as improve co-
operation in these areas, all of the relevant chain partners in Amsterdam are working on the 
introduction of an integral, chain partners approach to prostitution and THB. A system-
oriented approach has been chosen, along with an outreaching working method. As far as 
prostitutes are concerned, the central issue is strengthening their position (empowerment), 
whereas with victims of THB the key point is protection (against coercion and exploitation). 
The elements within this approach are: 
– a Prostitution Help, Advice and Health Centre; and 
– a THB Coordination Point. 
The chain partners in Amsterdam are also working on a licensing system for escorts, new 
policy in relation to prostitution involving young men, prevention of the loverboy problem, 
reception and support for addicted prostitutes and an approach focusing on perpetrators. 
Rotterdam, where there is already experience with a chain partners approach to juvenile 
prostitution and the loverboy problem, is working on an approach along similar lines. 

The Scarlet Cord [Het Scharlaken Koord]  
The Scarlet CordNRM3 (SK) is one of the participants in the integral system-based approach 
to prostitution and THB, as mentioned above, in Amsterdam. SK works on the streets with 
prostitutes, and this involves prevention, information and social assistance. One of the assis-
tance activities is the Exit programme [Uitstapprogramma], for women who want to stop 
prostitution work. They are offered: 
– an individual phased plan, dealing at the very least with their financial situation, housing, 

education or re-education and employment; 
– psycho-social help, aimed at dealing with any (sexual) traumas, building up a social net-

work and how to deal with their feelings and a different lifestyle; 
– a case manager as a point of contact. 

The Exit programme focuses in particular on window prostitutes, who are visited by SK 
during its work on the streets (and some of whom are victims of THB). Some elements in 
this approach can also be used with women who have not yet done any work behind a win-
dow, but who are, for example, already involved in the loverboy circuit.  

                                                                      
71 The focus is initially on victims of exploitation in the sex industry, but in the longer term the approach and 

collaborative effort will be extended to all victims of THB. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 67 

Unaccompanied underage asylum seekers (AMAs) and former ones; the Utrecht approach and 
SAMAH 
Earlier in this Chapter, we referred to the approach taken with former AMAs in Utrecht. 
The reception project run by the Stichting Vluchtelingenwerk in Utrecht – in a relaxed setting 
with computers, an Internet café and information on countries of origin – offers assistance 
to former AMAs when they are deciding about their future. The project workers have 
helped 350 AMAs and their 75 children since 2003. They endeavour to offer legal assistance, 
provide practical help (for instance with finding sports clubs), provide group information, 
organise country-specific evenings and try to help former AMAs to find out more about 
their countries of origin. The subject of repatriation will often arise spontaneously once a re-
lationship of trust has been built up. Some of these former AMAs will still get a residence 
permit and some will return to their countries of origin. One benefit of the project is that 
contact is maintained with the former AMAs, rather than letting them disappear into the 
realms of illegal residence. The effort is towards engendering pull factors from the countries 
of origin rather than persuading the former AMAs to repatriate by using a policy of pushing 
them into that decision (Oepkes et al., 2004). This approach is very popular, and is being fol-
lowed up in many municipalities. 

3.4 Dealing with juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem 

Juvenile prostitution is not the same as THB, but developments in this area are certainly 
relevant in the context of this report. After all, if someone introduces a minor to prostitu-
tion, this certainly constitutes THB, even if no coercion is involved. The involvement of a 
pimp or trafficker in human beings is not always immediately obvious, and juvenile prostitu-
tion is a phenomenon that has to be combated in itself, deserving attention from both the 
police and the social services.72 
When pimps use seduction techniques to draw girls into prostitution, they are what we de-
scribe as loverboys using loverboy techniques (see NRM3 for an extensive description of 
this operating method). But they are pimps nonetheless and, if they use coercion as part of 
their technique – or draw minors into prostitution – they are also human traffickers. As con-
firmed by Bovenkerk et al. (2006), there is actually no difference between the today's lover-
boy and yesterday’s pimp. Pimps have always used seduction techniques to get women into 
prostitution, and the same methods are applied in cross-border THB.NRM3 The loverboys of 
today are, however, probably more mobile (Bovenkerk et al. 2006). 

                                                                      
72 Research by the Rutgers Nisso Groep/SOA Aids Nederland into sex before the age of 25 showed that 18% of 

the girls and 4% of the boys had been forced into sex at least once, and that 2% of the boys and 1% of the girls 
had at some point received money or some other reward for sex (De Graaff et al., 2005). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 68 

3.4.1 Local initiatives 

The Association of Dutch Municipalities (VNG) took stock of the loverboy problem in Dutch 
municipalities in 2004. The problem appeared to be present in 14 of the 25 municipalities 
who returned the questionnaire,73 and some of the municipalities had taken considerable 
strides towards developing an approach to the issue. Many of the municipalities indicated 
that they wanted information on the approach taken by other municipalities. The VNG col-
lated this information into a Loverboys Information Directory.74 
Various municipal authorities now have juvenile prostitution projects and plans of approach 
to address the loverboy problem. Generally speaking these sorts of projects combine a re-
porting centre for loverboy problems with arrangements for an integrated and systematic 
approach, with the aim of preventing minors from being drawn into prostitution (e.g. as 
loverboy victims), preventing boys from becoming loverboys, providing adequate reception 
and assistance for victims and investigating and prosecuting suspects. In addition to local au-
thorities, the participating organisations usually include Juvenile Care Bureaus, the police, 
the public prosecution service, the Child Protection Agency and local projects, including 
those for sheltering victims. The approach in Zwolle is described in detail here as an example. 
 

The loverboy project in Zwolle 
There has been a Loverboy Project in Zwolle since 2000.NRM3 It has five aims and was evaluated in 
2005. Here are the aims (in italics), the working methods and some of the evaluation results (Kool, 
2005): 
- preventing girls from falling victim to loverboys 
 The preventative activities consisted of passing on information, resilience training and providing in-

formation at school, using a theatrical production and through development of a game. Awareness of 
the loverboy issue has now increased substantially in Zwolle.75 

- preventing boys from becoming loverboys 
 This involved the use of street workers who concentrated on meeting places, made contacts with the 

target group, took stock of the problems and encouraged boys towards courses or facilities in the 
fields of education, income, accommodation, care and/or leisure time.76 It turned out to be easiest to 
forge contacts with young adult men and with women than with the target group of 14- to 17-year-old 
youths. An attempt was made to contact this latter group via those who were over 18 and via the 
women. 

- getting victims out of the circuit 
 There is a Loverboys Reporting Centre where victims and their friends can go on a 24-hour basis. A 

Working Group for Assisting Victims of Loverboys meets every four weeks to discuss reports. About 
half of the reports come in via the Reporting Centre. This is where the assistance is allocated, and also 
where progress is monitored.77 A total of 193 reports were received between 2003 and 2005 concern-

                                                                      
73 44 municipalities were approached. 
74 See www.vng.nl. 
75 90% of girls between the ages of 12 and 15 know what a loverboy is, as do 97% of those between 16 and 24. 
76 The On Track Again working method. 
77 So as to be able to exchange information within the Working Group, a Covenant on Information Exchange 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 69 

ing possible victims; 83 assistance projects were completed and 27 temporary reception places pro-
vided (Municipality of Zwolle website). 

- investigation of suspects 
 In the period between 2003 and 2005, the police received 101 reports about men who might possibly 

be involved in loverboy activity. These resulted in 10 suspects in legal terms. 
- prosecution of suspects  
 Between 2003 and 2005, 1 suspect died and 5 were convicted (Municipality of Zwolle website). 
 
Some developments indicated since the start of the loverboy project: 
- girls are increasingly being approached via chat rooms; 
- girls undergoing special education and teenage mothers appear to be risk groups; 
- the ethnic diversity of males at risk of becoming involved in loverboy activities seems to be greater 

than had originally been assumed; 
- a distinction was observed between men who were at risk of sinking into crime because of a lack of 

prospects and men who want to earn a lot of money quickly. Prevention can only have an impact on 
the first group; 

- there were increases in the number of notifications of potential victims and the percentage of notifi-
cations resulting in some assistance being offered. Greater awareness of the phenomenon probably 
means that fewer false notifications are received, with a corresponding increase in the effectiveness 
of reaching victims; 

- loverboys now seem to be approaching the victims ‘only’ when they turn 17 (it used to be between 12 
and 17), so that they run a lower risk and so that the social services have less time to deploy any sanc-
tions (supervision orders or compulsory education).78 

(Source: Kool, 2005). 
The evaluation results were satisfactory, but the problem still persists. For this reason, the project is to 
be continued.  
Success factors include an administrator giving impetus to the project, a limited number of cooperat-
ing agencies, monitoring of activities and (as regards implementation) continuity, involvement, intrin-
sic motivation, collaboration and a focus on prevention. Despite these important local initiatives, there 
is still no national picture of the exact nature and scale of juvenile prostitution and the loverboy prob-
lem. The projects have different target groups and approaches, and there is no national feedback or re-
cord-keeping. Work is currently underway on a national register for juvenile prostitution. 

3.4.2 National institutions, projects and initiatives 

National register for juvenile prostitution 
The STV is setting up a national register for juvenile prostitution. This involves firstly noting 
which organisations are involved with this phenomenon. These vary from local institutions 
whose primary aim is the prevention of juvenile prostitution or the loverboy problem, to na-
tional institutions with a different or wider remit, but who nonetheless encounter juvenile 
prostitution. The proposed national register is designed not only to provide a national pic-
                                                                      

regarding Loverboys was drafted and approved by the Dutch Data Protection Authority. 
78 The proposal to extend the scope of application of the Juvenile Care Act [Wet op de Jeugdzorg] to 21-year-olds 

will offer a little more elbowroom here, provided that the programme has been embarked upon before the 
victim turns 18. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 70 

ture of the problem but also to benefit working processes within the organisations con-
cerned. It has been decided that the register will cover minors and young adults (up to the 
age of 24) who have ended up in prostitution, or run the risk of ending up in prostitution.79 
Client information will be recorded in relation to them along with information concerning 
the type of assistance or service provided.  

ECPAT-Netherlands 
ECPAT campaigns against the commercial sexual exploitation of children.NRM3 ECPAT 
lobbies the government, political parties and social organisations for adequate primary and 
subordinate legislation aimed at preventing sexual exploitation of children and also at pro-
viding proper assistance to victims. It also addresses the business world, including Internet 
service providers and the travel industry, on their responsibilities to protect children against 
sexual exploitation. A Code of Conduct has been developed for the travel industry, in col-
laboration with other ECPAT departments. This offers the travel industry (tour operators, 
airlines, hotels, travel agencies, etc.) concrete pointers for counteracting prostitution by minors. 
ECPAT also undertakes research. The results of research into exploitation of minors (Van 
de Borne & Kloosterboer, 2005) were dealt with earlier in this Chapter when we described 
minors as a risk group. The Law Enforcement Group of ECPAT-Europe has developed a 
multidisciplinary training programme for professionals working with children who are vic-
tims of trafficking for sexual purposes and children who run an increased risk of becoming 
such victims. Earlier research by this Law Enforcement Group (O’Briain, 2004)NRM3 
showed that many professionals (police, social workers) had too little understanding of 
these children and paid too little attention to them. An attempt is being made to raise aware-
ness among these professionals of the consequences of child trafficking for those children 
who are involved, and also to improve the protection of these children, using a training 
guide and a question and answer booklet (O’Briain et al., 2006a and b). The guide and the 
booklet contain a wealth of guidelines on how to deal with victims who are minors. Here is a 
selection of them. 
 

Guidelines for dealing with victims who are minors, a selection 
- act in the interests of the minor, and act as if you are dealing with your own child; 
- get a child to safety; 
- avoid having to repeat interviews, note down the information; 
- arrange for a risk assessment and a psychological assessment; 
- do not pressurise them as witnesses; 
- arrange for a guardian/case manager; 
- carry out a needs assessment; 
- give appropriate help, especially if there are special needs; 
- arrange educational facilities as quickly as possible; 
- accompany minors during medical examinations; 

                                                                      
79 The data set will allow distinctions between those who have actually ended up in prostitution and the risk 

group, and also between minors and young adults. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 71 

- only return them to their countries of origin if there is a suitable carer available there; 
- take account of the minor’s views as regards family reunification; 
- make sure that family reunification is assisted by professionals protecting the child's interests; 
- prepare any repatriation in advance and arrange for it to be in the company of a guardian or social 

worker. 
For more on this, see O’Briain et al. (2006a and b). 

Residential care 
Minors who are victims of loverboys, and also girls who are at risk of ending up in prostitu-
tion and who are not susceptible to help or prevention, for instance because of devotion to 
their loverboy, are difficult to help if they are on the streets or in open accommodation. They 
will often walk out within a few days (Van Dijke et al., 2006). This is why, for their own pro-
tection, they are taken off the circuit by means of a child protection sanction and placed in a 
judicial juvenile institution. This is a placement under civil law in a closed (reception) institu-
tion. While it is important to detach these girls from the loverboys, locking them up does not 
sit easily with the child's interests, certainly if treatment is not offered, perhaps for some 
time. Occasionally victims come into contact with suspects of loverboy offences inside the 
judicial institutions, and parents who opt for closed placement risk a breach of trust with 
their children, according to the Amsterdam Sexual Violence Support Centre (2005). This is 
where it is important to look for alternatives. 

One example is the 24-hour shelter at Asja,NRM3 part of Fryslân Women's Reception. This 
shelter facility operates on a voluntary basis. The support aims at building up a new future. 
The residents are assisted in making choices in areas such as school, employment, finances, 
relationships, going out and risky behaviour. Asja offers a structured daily programme fo-
cusing on coping, learning and developing. Asja tries to establish a dialogue with parents and 
the residents’ social network, because restoring or improving relationships with them is cru-
cial to successfully helping the residents. The transition to an independent existence involves 
a risk of falling back into the old familiar situation. The ‘Learning House’ – which is a stage 
between reception and an independent existence – is where residents gradually develop 
their own independence. They learn how to get a grip on their own situation and learn to be 
responsible in how they deal with freedoms and risks, primarily those to do with relation-
ships, sexuality, alcohol, drugs and money. 

Other National institutions, projects and initiatives 
– The National Juvenile Prostitution Platform [Landelijk Platform Jeugdprostitutie] was estab-

lished in 2003. The participants, who include local and regional organisations and also na-
tional institutions, exchange information a few times each year on recent developments in 
the area of juvenile prostitution and ongoing projects. The aim is to promote continued 
collaboration. 

– In the first half of 2005, Transact set up the Juvenile Prostitution Information Centre [In-
formatiepunt Jeugdprostitutie], which operates as a national information resource. It also 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 72 

sets up the meetings of the Juvenile Prostitution Platform and plays its part by collating 
good practices on how to deal with juvenile prostitution (2006 Working Plan: Transact, 
2005). At the end of 2006, the Ministry of Justice and the Ministry of Public Health, Wel-
fare and Sport gave the green light (and finance) for a three-year follow-up in the form of 
the Juvenile Prostitution Expertise Centre [Expertisepunt Jeugdprostitutie]. This has now 
been subsumed within the new ‘Movisie’ knowledge base. 

– Information is also being provided through School and Safety about what schools can do as 
regards safety at school, covering matters such as loverboys in relation to the school envi-
ronment. 

3.5 Points of attention and bottlenecks 

Asylum seekers 
– AMAs still disappear for unknown destinations. 
– The Protocol on Missing AMAs is complex and not sufficiently familiar to many of the co-

operating partners. This means that it does not work. 
– The termination of allowances for former AMAs has led in some cases to a marginal exis-

tence as an illegal resident with all of the associated risks, including becoming a victim of 
exploitation. 

– There is no register for missing adult asylum seekers. 

The position of victims 
– Tensions sometimes arise in practice between the strong policy on immigration and the 

provisions established for (possible) victims of THB (such as the possibility to report the 
crime to the police, being informed about the B-9 regulation, being offered time for reflec-
tion). 

– Progress has been recorded in the field of legal aid for victims of THB. 
– While it is quite clear that the B-9 regulation should be offered if there is the slightest indi-

cation of THB, there is uncertainty surrounding this in practice, and it does not always 
happen. 

– Contrary to the terms of the Victim Care Instruction, not every victim who has reported the 
crime of THB and who has indicated a desire to be kept informed of the progress of ‘his’ 
or ‘her’ criminal case is actually kept informed by the Public Prosecution Service. 

– Identification of possible victims of THB has improved in aliens’ detention; attention paid 
to this group and opportunities for supporting them have increased, but this remains a 
matter for concern, including situations involving male (potential) victims. 

– It is not easy to substantiate an application for continued residence, because in practice, 
the burden of proof is largely imposed on the victim. This problem no longer applies to 
some of the victims, since the most recent amendment to the B-9 regulation, but other vic-
tims may still encounter this problem. 



VICTIMS AND VICTIM SUPPORT 

 73 

Reception and assistance 
– The identification of and support for juvenile prostitutes and victims of THB (and of 

loverboys) are now largely – and increasingly – dealt with under a system-oriented chain 
partners approach. 

– Because of the increasing number of applications, it is difficult to find suitable accommo-
dation for victims of THB, or to do so quickly. 

– There are still very few places for male victims in shelter facilities, and none at all for them 
in safe houses. There is a question as to whether shelter facilities and social services are 
adequately geared to - and equipped for – assistance for male victims. Little is yet known 
about their needs. Nor is care coordination – often dealt with by coordinators working in 
the women's reception – yet universally available for this group. 

– Various Dutch municipalities have developed projects for addressing juvenile prostitution 
and the loverboy problem. Many of these projects cover how to deal with perpetrators 
(preventively and repressively). This does not seem to be easy, and is still in its infancy. 

Registration system 
– The STV victim registration system is missing a lot of information it could include. It is re-

grettable that this potentially very valuable source of information on victims of THB is not 
providing adequate results as regards anything more than basic background information, 
such as nationality, age, gender and the type of person making the notification. 

 





 75 

4 
 Administrative Enforcement in the  

Prostitution Sector 

4.1 Introduction 

The general ban on brothels was lifted and the commercial operation of prostitution was le-
galised in 2000 (see NRM3). Municipalities obtained the power to regulate the prostitution 
sector via a licensing system.  
More than five years after the ban on brothels was lifted, a decision was taken to evaluate the 
situation for a second time. In this context, a tripartite research was launched into municipal 
policy, the nature and scale of illegal prostitution, and the social position of prostitutes. The 
results were published in 2007. A new Police Force Monitor on trafficking in human beings 
(THB) was published in the same year. These publications, which cast more light on the 
state of affairs in relation to (law enforcement in) the sex industry, were not yet available at 
the time when this Report was written, though. This Chapter will briefly – and only insofar 
as relevant to the fight against THB – outline some significant developments in the sex in-
dustry and administrative enforcement in the sex industry. 

4.2 Developments in the sex industry 

Fewer licensed sex businesses 
The number of licensed sex businesses is decreasing. The number of clients is also diminish-
ing (Altink & Bokelman, 2006). 

New forms of prostitution 
In recent years, sexual services have also been on offer (clandestinely) outside the traditional 
sex establishments, for example in Turkish coffee houses, (Chinese and Thai) massage sa-
lons, (gay) saunas, couples’ clubs, (Chinese) hairdressers, nail studios and tanning studios. A 
‘hustler’ circuit has also come into existence, where clients are actively approached by mid-
dle-men or the prostitutes themselves, for example in hotels, night clubs and so on. Sexual 
services are also offered for payment via the Internet. Internet prostitution appears to be on 
the increase (Goderie et al., 2002), although there is no real view on the total scale of that 
market (KLPD, 2005). There are, however, signs that escorts and escort services are using 
the Internet for advertising purposes and to mediate between client and prostitute, and that 
in some cases dating sites are used as fronts for prostitution (De Blank in KLPD, 2005). It 
also seems that many young male prostitutes work via the Internet (Altink & Bokelman, 
2006), and that clients are also resorting to webcam sex. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 76 

Sex businesses along the lines of the German ‘FKK model’ have been set up in some police 
districts. These are ‘houses of recreation’ with a range of facilities (swimming pool, sauna, 
restaurant) and prostitutes wandering around, with whom clients can make their own ar-
rangements. The clients pay an entrance fee and negotiate separately with the prostitutes, 
who can come and go as they please. Prostitutes working on this basis in such establish-
ments meet the criteria for self-employment, a factor which makes this particular type of 
operation attractive to sex entrepreneurs, who generally do not want to take prostitutes on 
as salaried employees (see §2.2.3). The police also finds that German operators are now re-
cruiting clients in the Netherlands more often than was previously the case. 
 

Thai massage salons 
De Rode Draad confirms a remarkable increase in the number of Thai massage salons in the Nether-
lands (Altink & Bokelman, 2006). They visited 27 salons in the context of their field work. Knotter 
(2003) carried out ethnographic research into Thai massage salons and visited seven of them. Both 
studies share a number of observations: not all Thai massage salons offer sex; the sex that is on offer 
varies (from a hand job after a massage to regular sex); the atmosphere varies accordingly (from Thai 
hospitality with clients hanging around and joining in for meals, to commercial and business-like); 
some salons (including those offering sex) are licensed; the masseuses enter into marriages of conven-
ience to be able to work legally in the Netherlands, speak little Dutch and seem poorly integrated into 
Dutch society. Both studies report Thai massage salons refusing access to the researchers, not wanting 
to cooperate in any way and showing this in quite a blunt manner. It is unclear how often this hap-
pened. It seems likely that at these salons abuse may have been going on, but this could not be con-
firmed in any way. Both De Rode Draad and Knotter asked about and were on the lookout for signs of 
abuse at the salons they visited. De Rode Draad reports the imposition of debts, deception during re-
cruitment and dependency on the operators. Knotter indicates the activity of criminal organisations 
bringing women to the Netherlands and putting them to work in prostitution: ‘It was often difficult to 
discuss this subject and it only came to light once we had gained their full trust. This was not just be-
cause the masseuses had experienced terrible things (forced prostitution, exploitation, violence and in-
timidation) but also because the organisations are very powerful and dangerous.’ 

The illegal sex industry 
A proportion of the sex businesses mentioned earlier are unlicensed or illegal. An unli-
censed sex business can only be qualified as illegal if it is required to have a licence in the mu-
nicipality where it is based. 
The unlicensed and illegal circuit is associated with THB. The fact is that no administrative 
checks are made there, which makes it a suitable refuge for human traffickers. De Rode 
Draad visited 370 licensed and unlicensed sex businesses across the Netherlands and discov-
ered abuses such as extremely long working hours, living at the workplace, dependence on 
the operator and poor payment (Altink & Bokelman, 2006). These abuses may indicate 
THB. 



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT IN THE PROSTITUTION SECTOR 

 77 

Escorts 
Escort businesses based in municipalities where there is no licensing requirement for es-
corts can actually operate without restriction in every municipality in the Netherlands.  

Streetwalkers’ zones and street prostitution 
Streetwalkers’ zones were closed in a number of municipalities – Rotterdam, The Hague 
and Amsterdam – partly because the municipalities were increasingly coming under fire for 
facilitating THB there. The closures in Rotterdam and The Hague were accompanied by re-
ception facilities and an offer of assistance for Dutch (addicted) prostitutes. Streetwalkers’ 
zones were maintained or even opened in other municipalities. The proponents of street-
walkers’ zones point out that the social services and police can keep an eye on a group of 
prostitutes there, who would otherwise disappear from view. It is not clear whether the 
prostitutes who used to work in the streetwalkers’ zones that have been closed are still work-
ing, and if so where (Korf et al., 2005). In some municipalities, not only the prostitutes but 
also their pimps and clients are addressed in terms of the General Municipal Ordinance 
prohibiting street prostitution [Algemene Plaatselijke Verordening (APV)]. 

Accession of new EU member states 
Romania and Bulgaria joined the EU on 1 January 2007. When other countries in Central 
and Eastern Europe joined the EU in 2004, there was speculation that the number of prosti-
tutes and/or victims of THB from these countries would increase. No such increase has been 
established, probably for two reasons. First of all, the accession was preceded by abolition of 
the visa requirement, so that residents of the acceding countries could already come to the 
Netherlands and stay there (for three months) without visas. Secondly, restrictions on the 
free movement of labour from those countries were imposed when they joined the EU, 
making it difficult to work in the prostitution sector.1 There was in fact little change for pros-
titutes from these countries when they joined the EU. Since Bulgaria and Romania are in a 
similar position, an increase of prostitutes from these countries, upon their accession to the 
EU, is not anticipated either. Furthermore, all indications point to the fact that prostitutes 
from these countries who want to – or have to – work in the Netherlands are already here. 
Nor is the termination of the temporary restrictions on the free movement of workers from 
the new EU member states expected to have an impact on the number of prostitutes from 
these countries. Operators of sex establishments do not take on any salaried employees, but 
rather look for structures in terms of which the prostitutes are self-employed (see §2.2.3); 
and residents of the new member states are already allowed to work on a self-employed ba-
sis in the Netherlands. 

                                                                      
1 No employment permits for the prostitution sector are issued in the Netherlands. Independent self-

employment from the new member states is permitted, but subject to certain rules. See also Chapter 2. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 78 

4.3 Administrative enforcement 

Since the general ban on brothels was lifted, the municipalities are to pursue a local policy on 
prostitution, based on a licensing system for the operation of sex businesses. This section 
discusses how enforcement takes place, primarily as it relates to the rules on THB. 

4.3.1 Preventive enforcement 

Preventive enforcement is aimed at preventing offences and abuses. In the regulation of the 
prostitution industry, preventive enforcement is primarily undertaken through the issue of 
licences. This job is done by the municipalities. 

The General Municipal Ordinance (APV) 
Municipalities can set out rules in the APV on the establishment, set-up and operation of sex 
establishments within their area limits. As far as we are aware, all municipalities that have 
adopted a prostitution policy use the APV to impose, as a condition of granting a licence, a 
prohibition against putting minor or undocumented prostitutes or victims of THB to work. 
These municipalities have made different choices as to which forms of prostitution are cov-
ered by the licensing system. As far as we are aware, virtually all of the municipalities have 
included brothels and window prostitution in the licensing system. This does not apply in 
relation to escort services, home workers or street prostitution. 

The ‘BIBOB’ Act [Public Administration Probity Screening Act] 
The BIBOB Act2 can play an important part in the granting of licences to operators or aspir-
ing operators in the prostitution sector. This Act allows for a licence not to be issued or not 
to be extended if there is a serious risk that it is likely also to be used for the commission of 
criminal offences or the enjoyment of the proceeds of such offences. 
In 2005, 11% of the requests for advice to the BIBOB Bureau related to operating licences for 
sex businesses.3 
A public prosecutor who has information indicating that a party involved is connected with 
an offence can point out to an administrative body the desirability of asking for a BIBOB ad-
vice. Pilots were undertaken between the end of 2004 and the start of 2006 in three regions, 
in order to gain experience in this area. These resulted in twelve tip-offs from the Public 
Prosecution Service (PPS) to various municipalities and five requests by municipalities for 
advice from the BIBOB Bureau. 

When this Chapter was being written, an evaluation of the BIBOB Act was about to be 
completed. One question the evaluation looks at is whether the implementation of the Act 

                                                                      
2 Act of 18 October 2001, Parliamentary Papers II, 2001.02, 26 883, no. 73, which entered into force on 1 June 2003. 
3 This means that advice on this subject was requested in 9 cases. Provisional information from the BIBOB 

Bureau of 2 April 2007 showed that 24 requests for advice were submitted in 2006 in connection with licences 
for sex businesses. 



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT IN THE PROSTITUTION SECTOR 

 79 

has led to any shift of crime towards the unlicensed sector (in terms of the sex industry) or to 
different municipalities. 

The municipality of Amsterdam was the first administrative body in the Netherlands to try 
and formulate an administrative approach to organised crime on the larger scale, under the 
‘Van Traa’ project (Huisman et al., 2005). This project involved the collection and analysis of 
relevant information (also from partners such as the police, the PPS and the Tax Admini-
stration) and on the basis of this information the adoption of administrative measures in the 
prostitution sector. The evaluation (Huisman et al., 2005) shows that it is impossible to 
compel cooperation from the partners, and that informational housekeeping on the part of 
city district authorities and municipal services is inadequate. The researchers also indicate 
that there seems to be some sort of mutual dependence between sex club owners and the 
municipality: the operators need the municipality to obtain licences, for example, but they 
also have a means of exerting pressure through their ownership of real estate.4 Nevertheless 
some results were achieved, such as the introduction of screening procedures for the issue of 
licences. The approach in Amsterdam is in line with the concept of ‘obstruction’5 introduced 
by the police and, according to the Minister of Justice, it offers important pointers for fur-
ther development of an approach where criminal law enforcement coexists and cooperates 
with administrative enforcement. 

Amsterdam is one of the cities with a high concentration of prostitution using the BIBOB 
Act for administrative enforcement in the sex industry. Having obtained advice from the 
BIBOB Bureau, the municipality of Amsterdam made known its intention in 2006 not to is-
sue or extend 37 licences for the operation of sex businesses in the Red Light District.6 The 
parties concerned lodged formal objections and, at the time of writing this Report, the case 
is still before the courts. In the meantime, by a provisional relief the businesses are allowed 
to remain open.  

                                                                      
4 They can threaten to ‘sell up’ everything, or rent it out to people they know the municipality would prefer to 

keep out of the area. Or perhaps the operator owns property which the municipality would like to use in a 
particular way. This sometimes led to a trade-off, for example with the municipality allowing a certain activity at 
site X in exchange for a concession from the other party at site Y. 

5 This concept, introduced by the Investigation Project Group under the chairmanship of the Chief Constable of 
the Amsterdam Police, is based on the idea that an criminal law approach alone is not enough, and that barriers 
must be erected by every imaginable partner – for example central government, municipalities, the business 
community, and citizens – in order to prevent crime or put an early stop to it.  

6 A press release from the municipality of Amsterdam dated 30 November 2006 mentioned 33 licences in the 
prostitution sector, 3 in the catering business and one building permit for a sex business. Two of the licences 
related to sex businesses in a different part of the city. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 80 

4.3.2 Supervision 

In most Dutch municipalities, (administrative) checks on compliance with licence condi-
tions for running a sex establishments are undertaken by the police.7 From the perspective 
of this ‘supervisory duty’, a distinction can be made in the sex industry between:8 
1. licensed and site-specific sex businesses (e.g. licensed clubs, window prostitution and 

home workers); 
2. licensed non site-specific sex businesses (e.g. licensed escort bureaus); and 
3. unlicensed sex businesses that actually are required to have a licence (site-specific or not) 

(e.g. businesses where the commercial sex is clandestine (see §4.2)). 

Supervision of the first category is relatively speaking the most straightforward and is also 
the most systematic. But the checks still leave something to be desired in some police dis-
tricts. Sex establishments are not, for example, visited often enough. Abuses – including vic-
tims of THB – are still found in the licensed circuit.9  

The supervision over the second category, or escort sector, needs further explanation. Ini-
tially there were no mechanisms available for supervising the escort sector, but these have 
now been developed. One example is the ‘hotel procedure’ where a police officer pretends 
to be a client and orders an escort, whereupon he will check whether the prostitute is of age, 
the legality of her residential status and whether she is working of her own free will. One 
disadvantage of the ‘hotel procedure’ is that it takes up a lot of capacity. A mechanism taking 
up less capacity is the so-called ‘fax bombardment’. Untraceable mobile numbers found in 
escort adverts are deluged with fax or text messages every 2 minutes. The message is to the 
effect that the recipient is operating an unlicensed escort business and must contact the mu-
nicipality. The aim here is to make it impossible for the business to operate by ensuring that 
it can no longer be reached. 

The ‘Plan of Approach, Regulation and Protection in the Prostitution Sector’ [Plan van Aan-
pak, Ordening en Bescherming Prostitutiesector]10 proposes measures for improving adminis-
trative enforcement in the prostitution sector in general, and the escort sector in particular. 
One of these measures is a national registration system for escort licences. At the time when 
this Report was being written, the Ministry of Justice had instructed that research be carried 
out into how such a system could be set up. 

                                                                      
7 The police are then acting as a mandated supervisory body. 
8 The unlicensed operation of sex businesses (which are not covered by the licensing system) is permitted in 

those municipal areas where no licensing system has been introduced or where certain forms of prostitution 
have been excluded from it (such as escorts and working from home), so that these sex businesses are not 
supervised either. Prostitutes working on a self-employed basis are classified with the sex businesses for this 
overview. 

9 This is assumed in police circles, but also indicated in a study by De Rode Draad (Altink & Bokelman, 2006) and 
the STV 2005 Annual Report.  

10 Submitted to the Lower House by the Minister of Justice on behalf of the Cabinet in July 2004. 



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT IN THE PROSTITUTION SECTOR 

 81 

Checks on the unlicensed (illegal) sex industry (the third category) happen significantly less 
often than checks on the licensed sex industry. In most municipalities, it is prohibited to run 
an unlicensed sex establishment. This means that supervising agencies must first check 
whether or not there is a sex business, which is not always easy. 

Illegality and THB 
Under the transitional arrangements for the free movement of workers within the EU, citi-
zens of the member states which joined the EU in 2004 and 2007 may work in the Nether-
lands as prostitutes on a self-employed basis, but not as employees. In other words, a Bulgar-
ian prostitute, for example, would be legal in the Netherlands if she was working as a self-
employed individual in the sex industry, but illegal if she was in paid employment here. It is 
therefore necessary for those supervising the prostitution sector to check on the employ-
ment status, in order to establish whether or not someone is legally residing in the Nether-
lands. This is not simple, however – especially when sex work is taking place in the club cir-
cuit. Hitherto, operators and prostitutes in this sector claim that the work is on a self-
employed basis, while the Tax Administration concluded, in all of the cases it has investi-
gated, that prostitutes were working as paid employees at clubs. The question is how a (mu-
nicipal) supervisor can check on this employment status (Brugman, 2005). The National 
Expert Group on THB [Landelijke Expertgroep Mensenhandel (LEM)] has accordingly ob-
served that the police have no possibilities for checking whether or not someone is working 
in paid employment, and that the police can thus only check on illegal residence. It is left to 
the Tax Administration and the Immigration and Naturalisation Service [Immigratie- en 
Naturalisatiedienst (IND)] to check the employment situation and its implications for resi-
dential status. However, this also has consequences for administrative checks on THB. Pre-
viously, prostitutes residing in the Netherlands illegally could be stopped and taken to the 
police station, where they would also be interviewed about possibly being a victim of THB. 
In these circumstances, the police claim, victims were more inclined to talk about this than 
when at their places of work. Now that prostitutes from the new EU countries can reside le-
gally in the Netherlands, and their employment situation is not being (or cannot be) 
checked, the opportunity to ‘pry them loose’ from their situation no longer exists, which 
means that it is more difficult to detect victims of THB and to obtain reports of the offence 
from them. Checking up on employment situations has the disadvantage that it is confronta-
tional for prostitutes, whether or not they are victims of THB. The police come to be re-
garded as the long arm of the Tax Administration, which can be obstructive to building up 
any relationship of trust with prostitutes. This factor can also hinder the detection of victims. 

Duty and role of the police and the municipality 
As it became clear that there was uncertainty about the duty and role of the police in relation 
to enforcement in the prostitution sector, the steering group of the Quality Enforcement 
Project [‘Handhaven op Niveau’] determined that the administrative authority should fully 
carry the strategic responsibility for the implementation of enforcement duties, and that 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 82 

with the police input should be complementary to the administrative input. The police nev-
ertheless indicate that there is a lack of initiative on this within many municipalities. This co-
incides with the findings of Bressers et al. (2006). 
If during administrative checks the police come across on any criminal offences, then they 
may proceed with a criminal investigation as a continuation of this exercise. If, however, 
when exercising their duties under criminal law, the police happen on breaches of licensing 
conditions, they are not in a position to take any administrative steps themselves. Such steps 
are only possible if the administrative authority is informed. For that reason, the instrument 
of the administrative report was introduced. This is a written notification of the police to the 
administrative authority of a municipality, stating that – in the course of their duties under 
criminal law – they have encountered facts and circumstances that are being brought to the 
attention of the administrative authority. The administration can then take appropriate ad-
ministrative measures if it wishes, separate from any possible measures under criminal law. 
In practice, written reports by the police – as the administrative supervisor – to the munici-
palities are also called ‘administrative reports’.  

Erotic Advertising Covenant 
Since October 2005, sex businesses that place erotic adverts in (priced as opposed to free) 
daily newspapers are required to include their licence number in their adverts.11 This makes 
supervision easier.12 The Covenant also establishes that text will be interspersed among the 
erotic adverts drawing customers’ attention to the fact that they will run less risk of, for in-
stance, encountering a victim of THB, if they deal with a licensed business. This allows the 
customer to make a well-considered choice.  

4.3.3 Repressive enforcement 

Preventive enforcement – taking the form of granting licences on certain conditions – has 
the greatest impact if it is coupled with consistent and visible repressive enforcement. In 
other words, sanctions must be imposed on licence holders who do not observe the condi-
tions. These may vary from a warning, a restriction in opening hours or imposition of an 
administrative penalty, to the temporary or permanent closure of the sex establishment and 
revocation of the licence.  

Administrative activity not up to scratch 
There is criticism on the administrative enforcement by municipalities. Police forces 
charged with supervising the prostitution sector regularly mention municipalities failing to 
address cases (abuses) or failing to respond to administrative reports by the police.  

                                                                      
11 This is set out in an agreement between the Ministry of Justice and the Dutch Daily Press Group [Groep 

Nederlandse Dagbladpers]. 
12 Publishers of daily papers were already obliged under administrative law to provide information on advertisers 

if asked to do so. 



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT IN THE PROSTITUTION SECTOR 

 83 

4.3.4 Amendment of legislation and regulations 

Various parties argue that there are shortcomings in the current enforcement policy and leg-
islation. For example, they feel that the present statutory framework is inadequate to make 
non site-specific prostitution manageable, and that there is no uniform policy. These are 
some of the reasons why Asante and Schaapman (2005) and Altink and Bokelman (2006) 
argue for amendments to laws and regulations. 

Decentralised prostitution policy, which was opted for when the general ban on brothels 
was lifted, has resulted in local differences as regards the substance of licence conditions as 
well as the scope of General Municipal Ordinances. The differences between the various 
municipal licensing systems result in disparate opportunities for supervision and enforce-
ment, which exploitative operators and human traffickers can take advantage of. 

The ‘water bed’ effect can be counteracted by providing a stricter national framework for 
decentralised prostitution policy through additional formal legislation. This can be done in 
various ways, also in such a way that municipalities maintain scope to pursue a prostitution 
policy attuned to local preferences and needs. Municipal authorities should be obliged to 
regulate certain matters in their local prostitution policy, which at the moment is only op-
tional. 
This might involve amendment of the Municipalities Act [Gemeentewet] in such a way that 
municipalities would have to develop a licensing system for every establishment where 
commercial sexual transactions are provided, or where facilities are provided for such trans-
actions to be undertaken with or for a third party. In other words, a compulsory local prosti-
tution policy in relation to all forms of prostitution including escort, home work and any-
thing that might be developed in future in terms of creative business formats in this area. In 
this scenario, the responsibility for developing the substantive licence conditions and en-
forcement of the policy would remain with the municipalities themselves. 
There are, however, other options, for example more far-reaching legislation, including a 
prescription of substantive (minimum) standards to be imposed and enforced at the local 
level.13 These and other possible forms of further formalisation of a decentralised prostitu-
tion policy require further scrutiny by legislative jurists and interested parties. 
The fact that shortcomings of legislation and enforcement at the local level impact on the 
occurrence of THB does not alter the fact that central government remains responsible for 
combating THB. Improving the fight against involuntary prostitution was one of the targets 
of the abolition of the general ban on brothels, and the responsibility for achieving this tar-
get still lies with central government. 

                                                                      
13 Greater uniformity in municipal policies regarding substantive licensing conditions could also be promoted via 

the Netherlands Association of Municipalities [Vereniging Nederlandse Gemeenten (VNG)]. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 84 

4.4 Points of attention and bottlenecks 

– A part of the sex industry is illegal, or not subject to licensing requirements. There are in-
adequate checks in this part of the industry for abuses, so that it amounts to a refuge for 
human traffickers. This category includes, for example, businesses clandestinely offering 
sexual services, such as Turkish coffee houses, massage salons, saunas, hairdressing sa-
lons, nail studios and tanning studios, along with – in some municipalities – prostitutes 
who work from home. 

– Non site-specific prostitution businesses (such as escort services) do not require a licence 
in every municipality, and where they do, the administrative checks are not easy and la-
bour-intensive. 

– It is hard to supervise businesses (whether they operate illegally or not) where both paid 
and unpaid sex takes place, such as couples clubs. When prostitutes, who might be vic-
tims of THB, pose as unpaid participants, the supervisory agencies are powerless. 

– Abuses, including (indicators pointing towards) THB, are also found in the licensed sex 
industry. The fact that it is still possible to put victims of THB to work in the licensed sex 
industry is not always the fault of the operator or the supervising agency. Victims are 
sometimes very adept at concealing the fact that they are victims of THB, aided by the 
fact that human traffickers are often very expert in fabricating false identity documents. 
If victims are working legally, the supervising agencies have few tools to investigate the 
situation. This applies, for instance, to victims coming from the new EU member states 
of Bulgaria and Romania, who because of their self-employed status work legally in pros-
titution in the Netherlands. These countries have long been among the significant coun-
tries of origin for victims. 

– The municipalities are charged with taking the initiative and responsibility for adminis-
trative enforcement of the prostitution sector. A number of municipalities are failing in 
this area. For example, measures are not always adopted in response to administrative 
reports of confirmed abuses. This obstructs the aim of achieving a ‘clean’ licensed sex in-
dustry (and the smallest possible illegal sex industry). Because not every abuse can be de-
tected with (administrative) checks, even in the licensed sex industry, other parties do 
also carry responsibility, including clients, operators, social workers, neighbours, pass-
ers-by and others who are involved in the field, professionally or otherwise. 

– A number of municipalities have closed down streetwalkers’ zones. The impact of this is 
not yet clear. We do not know, for instance, where the (illegal) prostitutes who worked 
there, and who might be victims of THB, have gone. 

– The results of administrative checks and enforcement are not sufficiently transparent, so 
there is a lack of knowledge concerning abuses found in the licensed sex industry. This 
also makes it difficult to verify allegations of such abuses. 

– Maintaining administrative supervision on the escort sector takes up police capacity, and 
some municipalities do not make any compensation for this, although this has been agreed. 



ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT IN THE PROSTITUTION SECTOR 

 85 

– It is evident that collaboration and exchange of information among the chain partners, 
such as the police, PPS, Tax Administration and others, can lead to positive results in 
both preventive and repressive enforcement in the prostitution sector. 

 





 87 

5 
 Investigation 

5.1 Introduction 

This chapter deals with the investigation of trafficking in human beings (THB) and the way 
this has been affected by the expansion of the article on THB in the Dutch Criminal Code. 
One of its results is an increase in the number of parties involved in the investigation of 
THB. 

5.2 National developments (including policy developments) and 
initiatives 

5.2.1 Police 

Management of the police 
The State has assumed greater control over the management of the police, partly through 
the establishment of national priorities in investigation, setting up a National Crime Squad 
[Nationale RechercheNRM3 (NR)] and concluding performance contracts with all of the re-
gional police forces.1  

Focus on Trafficking in Human Beings 
The Ministers of Justice and of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, the Public Prosecution 
Service (PPS) and the police have repeatedly highlighted the priority of combating THB, al-
beit sometimes under the heading of migration crime and/or in the context of people smug-
gling. The Ministers of Justice and of the Interior and Kingdom Relations have formulated 
six priorities for the National Crime Squad and the National Public Prosecutor in the years 
ahead. THB is one of them.2 

National THB Expert Group 
The Prostitution & THB Project of the Dutch police [Project Prostitutie Mensenhandel van de 
Nederlandse politie (PPM/dNP)NRM3] came to an end as a project on 1 January 2004, but con-
tinued under the name of the National THB Expert Group [Landelijke Expertgroep Mensen-
handel (LEM)].  

                                                                      
1 Various publications have warned about the negative effects of this system, such as the (un)intentional selection 

of more straightforward cases, manipulation of data and a reduced orientation towards the local environment 
(Vlek et al., 2004; Jochoms et al., 2006).  

2 The other areas are people smuggling, trafficking in cocaine or heroin, synthetic drugs; illegal trafficking in 
firearms and explosives; terrorism and other extreme forms of ideologically motivated crime and money 
laundering. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 88

LEM is scheduled to publish a new THB Police Force Monitor [Korpsmonitor] in 2007, de-
scribing the actual state of affairs in relation to the fight against THB. It was clear from the 
last THB Police Force Monitor (Coster, 2004) that not every regional police force was yet 
meeting the standards set at the time.  
Other relevant LEM products and activities will be discussed elsewhere in this Chapter. 

Expertise Centre on THB & People Smuggling  
The Expertise Centre on THB & People Smuggling [Expertisecentrum Mensenhandel en 
Mensensmokkel (EMM)] was set up at the National Crime Squad on 18 May 2005 and is a 
collaborative venture between KLPD, (National Crime Squad and dNRI [National Crime 
Intelligence Service]), the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee (Koninklijke Marechausee), 
Social Investigation and Information Service [Sociale Inlichtingen en Opsporingsdienst 
(SIOD)] and Immigration and Naturalisation Service [Immigratie- en Naturalisatiedienst 
(IND)]. EMM operates as a collection point for information on, among other things, (indi-
cations of) THB (both within and outside the sex industry). The information is supplied by 
institutions dealing with THB, from the perspectives of investigation, supervision, checks or 
assistance.3 At EMM, this information is processed, analysed and made available for tactical 
and strategic purposes.  
The EMM is directed by the National Public Prosecutor, who coordinates the campaign 
against THB and people smuggling at the National Public Prosecutor’s office. 

Operational Consultation Group on Trafficking in Human Beings 
The Operational Consultation Group on Trafficking in Human Beings [Operationeel Over-
leg Mensenhandel (OOM)], in which all regional police forces exchange operational informa-
tion on THB, still meets every two months.NRM3  

Aliens Police 
Some of the tasks of the Aliens Police were taken over by the IND and the municipalities in 
2003 and 2004,4 so more investigative capacity within the Aliens Police became available. 
This capacity is also being deployed in various regional police forces to help combat THB. 

5.2.2 Royal Netherlands Marechaussee 

Since 1993, the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee had been supplying staffing capacity to 
police forces to support actions against cross-border crime. This capacity, in the form of 
cross-border crime squads [GOC teams], was also deployed to combat THB. These cross-
border crime squads were disbanded with effect from 1 January 2006. Collaboration with 
the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee does continue to take place in expertise centres, with 

                                                                      
3 The importance of reporting indications of THB by the various institutions to EMM is described in the THB 

Guidelines (Aanwijzing mensenhandel) issued by the Board of Procurators General (entered into force on 1 April 
2006). 

4 These included aliens’ administration (by the IND) and front office duties (by the municipalities). 



INVESTIGATION  

 89 

regard to specific areas of attention, including that of dealing with ‘cross-border trafficking 
in human beings’.  

5.2.3 Special Investigation Services and Inspection Services 

The number of organisations involved in detecting and investigating THB has grown, be-
cause the criminalisation of THB with effect from 1 January 2005 also covers exploitation 
outside the sex industry and coerced organ removal. The THB Guidelines issued by the Board 
of Procurators General mentions several organisations that might encounter forced labour 
or services in the context of their supervision and enforcement. Apart from the police, the 
Royal Netherlands Marechaussee, municipalities and the Harbour Police, these include – 
among others – the Health and Safety Inspectorate [Arbeidsinspectie (AI)], the SIOD, and the 
Fiscal Information and Investigation Service/Economic Audit Service [Fiscale Inlichtingen- 
en Opsporingsdienst/Economische Controledienst (FIOD/ECD)].5  

5.3 Identifying (possible) THB situations 

This section will explore the way in which indications of THB are identified and how they 
actually or potentially reach the investigation agencies. 

Identifying (possible) THB situations by the police 
The police have an important part to play in identifying cases of THB. This is partly a result 
of their supervisory duties in the prostitution industry (see Chapter 4) and partly based on 
their role in criminal law enforcement. The police have deployed a range of activities in re-
cent years in order to improve on the identification, and registration of indications of THB. 
A list of indications that might point towards exploitation in the sex industry was developed 
some time ago.NRM3 This list of indications has been adjusted so that it can now be used for 
the investigation of exploitation in other employment sectors, apart from the sex industry, 
as well, and also for investigation of coerced organ removal. Another new feature is the re-
cording of indications that might point towards an increased risk for certain individuals of 
becoming a victim of THB, such as sudden behavioural changes, running away or poor con-
tacts with home. The list of indications can also be used by bodies other than the police. 
A booklet on THB has been developed in order to increase awareness of the phenomenon 
of THB in employment sectors other than the sex industry and to bring about a general im-
provement in the identification of THB. This booklet has been distributed both within the 
police and elsewhere. This sort of activity is important, because THB – within the sex indus-
try and elsewhere – is not always recognised as such by police officers and signs of it are not 

                                                                      
5 The services mentioned here, with the exception of the Health and Safety Inspectorate (AI), are special 

investigation services [bijzondere opsporingsdiensten (BODs)]. The AI is an inspection service with officials 
appointed as special detective officers authorised to investigate particular criminal offences, which do not 
include THB. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 90 

always recorded as such in police systems. For this reason, some regional police forces use 
special search questions to filter out any indications of THB from the police systems. Gen-
erally this operates very successfully, particularly as regards indications of ‘loverboy’ situa-
tions.  
In its 2007 Annual Plan, LEM indicates that the information campaign on THB entitled 
‘Appearances are deceptive’ [‘Schijn bedriegt’] must be continued, at a national level, in light 
of its success so far. It should also be expanded to cover other forms of exploitation. 
Attention has also been focussed on THB in the national training for ‘runners’ in the Crimi-
nal Intelligence Units (CIEs) since 2005. We are not aware, at the present time, of exactly 
how much information on THB the CIEs are actively acquiring. Projects however have been 
started up in some regional police forces with a view to improving the information position 
for the CIEs as regards THB. There are regular comments on the difficulty of initiating 
criminal investigations on the basis of CIE information. Various criminal investigations 
have, however, been instigated in recent years, based (partly) on CIE information.NRM3  
In some regional police forces, cards – whether obviously issued by the police or otherwise – 
have been passed out to prostitutes, containing information about where they can report 
any abuse. They sometimes include both the telephone number of the police force and the 
number of Meld Misdaad Anoniem [Report Crime Anonymously (= Crimestoppers)].6 
The intention is that any serious indications of THB will be passed on to EMM. These indi-
cations – possibly taken in aggregate – may result in new cases or may be relevant to ongoing 
ones.  

Despite these various initiatives, the identification of signs of THB is not yet as satisfactory 
as it could be. There are a number of reasons for this, some of which are beyond the control 
of the police. For example, victims of THB do not always want to be recognised as such, and 
sometimes do everything in their power to avoid being spotted. This may be due to fear of 
the traffickers or the fact that they are actually earning some income, however little, so that 
they have an interest in trying to ensure that their situation does not change. This does not 
alter the fact that victims who do wish to break free from their situation are not always rec-
ognised or helped by the police. For example, a group of victims may never come in contact 
with the police, because there are insufficient police checks in the illegal sex industry, even 
though it might be assumed that this sector would include more victims of THB than the li-
censed sector. The same applies to victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex in-
dustry, although there are also other bodies, apart from the police, who can pick up signs of 
THB here. The Aliens Police have a specific role in identifying signs of THB, both within the 
sex industry and elsewhere. Because of their potential involvement with (illegally resident 
and/or working) victims when dealing with illegal immigration, an awareness of the signs of 
THB is very important for this service. Awareness in this area on the part of the Aliens Po-
lice leaves something to be desired, however. This is partly a result of their focus on the re-

                                                                      
6 M. is the contact line for the foundation ‘Report Crime Anonymously’ (also known as ‘Crimestoppers’), where 

information on criminal offences can be reported anonymously by telephone.  



INVESTIGATION  

 91 

moval of illegal immigrants, which conflicts with the necessary attention to detect and pro-
tect (possible) victims of THB. In practice, BLinN for example has noted that staff at the 
Aliens Police – and at centres for detention of aliens – are in fact prepared to cooperate with 
improvements in connection with the identification of THB (Boermans, 2006).  
Victims who are prepared to report the offence are not always offered the opportunity, 
and/or they are not offered the facilities to which they are entitled, for example in the con-
text of the B-9 regulation. In certain cases it appears that the period for reflection, in particu-
lar, is either not offered or is offered for less than three months. 
It also appears that – contrary to the THB Guidelines – the police do not always pass on re-
ports of offences involving THB to the PPS, but either drop them or dispose of them in-
house, for example if they think the case is not interesting from the perspective of criminal 
law.7 In fact, police officers have indicated that if they invest time with possible victims (i.e. if 
they build up some degree of confidence and provide accurate information), the victims will 
– relatively often – be actually prepared to report the offence after all. 

EMM operates as a collection point for information on (indications of) THB, both for the 
police and for other bodies (see §5.2.1). However, not every regional police force currently 
provides information to EMM on a systematic basis or on its own initiative. Reporting by 
other bodies which might provide indications of THB also requires improvement. At EMM 
itself, there were actually unfilled vacancies for about a year and a half after it was set up, so 
that it was battling against a backlog of information processing.  

Identifying (possible) THB situations by the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee 
The Royal Netherlands Marechaussee views its role in identifying indications of THB as a 
major one. One team of the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee [Sluisteam] operating at Schi-
phol airport also keeps its eyes open for THB, in addition to being alert for possible cases of 
people smuggling. Frequently encountered indications of THB include multiple sponsor-
ship arrangements, suitcases full of lingerie and fake or forged identity documents. Accord-
ing to the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee, maintaining a keen observation of people in 
transit areas (which account for 70% of the passengers visiting Schiphol) is particularly fruit-
ful in supplying indications of possible cases of THB. These transit areas are the places 
where, for example, passports are exchanged or new tickets are supplied. There are in-
stances of individuals who only buy a flight ticket so as to be able to enter the transit area; 
they have no intention of flying. 

Identifying (possible) THB situations by other (investigation) services and bodies 
Other organisations also encounter indications and/or victims of THB, such as the SIOD, 
the AI, the FIOD/ECD, the IND and certain assistance organisations and interest groups.  

                                                                      
7 See, for example, The Monitor Trafficking in Human Beings on the position of victims (Van Vianen et al., 2006). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 92 

The SIOD deals with fraud in the areas of employment and income. Many of the SIOD in-
vestigations relate primarily to organised illegal employment.8 These investigations, which 
often concern (possible cases of) people smuggling, regularly disclose that migrant workers 
are dependent on those who provide the work, for instance with regard to forged identity 
documents and/or accommodation. This multiple dependency is a sign of possible exploita-
tion. The SIOD focuses on specific risk categories, for example certain business sectors. In 
2005, these included horticulture, fruit growing and the food industry. These are economic 
activities that have come up as risk sectors for THB in the BNRM research of exploitation in 
sectors other than the sex industry (see Chapter 8). If the SIOD has indications of THB that 
go beyond the service’s own duties and powers, then the National Office of the Public 
Prosecutor or the competent local Public Prosecutor’s office will be informed. Indications of 
cases that do fall within its own ambit are dealt with by the National Public Prosecutor’s Of-
fice for Economic and Environmental Offences [Functioneel Parket (FP)]. In this context, the 
SIOD undertakes its own investigations into THB (see §5.4 on this). 
BNRM research has shown that the Labour Market Fraud Teams of the AI are in a good po-
sition to spot exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry (see Chapter 8). These 
teams visit the shop floor in many of the economic sectors where there is an increased risk of 
exploitation, in order to monitor compliance with the Aliens Employment Act [Wet arbeid 
vreemdelingen (WAV)]. Domestic work forms an important exception, because stricter con-
ditions apply to inspection in private households. The BNRM study on exploitation outside 
the sex industry also shows that when the inspectors from these teams recognise signs of se-
rious abuse, they generally pass the information on to colleagues within the AI responsible 
for enforcing regulations on working conditions. Nearly half of the 14 labour market fraud 
teams indicated that they also drew the attention of other bodies – such as municipalities, 
SIOD or the police or Aliens Police – to possible exploitative situations.  
Since 2005, the AI can dispose of cases of illegal employment by imposing an administrative 
fine. As far as identifying possible THB is concerned, this has the disadvantage that no (fur-
ther) investigation is made and no official report is made out, beyond a report for the fine, so 
that there is a chance that less information on abuse is being documented and passed to 
other bodies. Following the amendment of the Minimum Wage and Minimum Holiday Al-
lowance Act (in connection with the introduction of administrative enforcement), the AI 
will in future also be responsible for the administrative enforcement of this Act. This may 
contribute towards the further identification and combating of exploitation 
The primary area of investigation for the FIOD/ECD, the investigation service of the Tax 
Administration, is fiscal fraud. According to the Tax Administration Annual Report 2005, 
FIOD/ECD employees are sometimes confronted with signs of exploitative practices dur-
ing their investigations at businesses.  

                                                                      
8 In 2005, this was the case in 36 out of a total of 76 investigations (SIOD, 2006). 



INVESTIGATION  

 93 

As regards the information base of the services mentioned above, it may be instructive for 
the Netherlands to look at the Belgian experience in dealing with THB for exploitation in 
sectors other than the sex industry. 
 

The Belgian approach to exploitation outside the sex industry9 
Exploitation outside the sex industry has been punishable in Belgium for longer than in the Nether-
lands.10 The Belgian experience shows that it is not easy to secure an effective contribution from in-
spection services and special investigation services in the fight against THB. Although the Belgian So-
cial Inspectorate and the Inspectorate of Social Laws have been involved in this since 2001, no joint 
checks are made in some districts, or there is no contact between the Social Inspectorate and the THB 
contact officers. The inspection services also make little use of their powers to prepare official reports 
in relation to THB. This may be the result of a lack of experience and the fact that their principal duty is 
to investigate labour law infringements, and they view THB as being a job for the police. Other prob-
lems in Belgium include the fact that the inspection and investigation services do not always recognise 
victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry as such and that, eschewing any uniform 
policy, not all of the partners deal with victims in the same way. According to the Belgian Centre for 
Equal Opportunities and Opposition to Racism, there is a need to train all of the partners involved in 
finding, identifying and making referrals for victims of exploitation in other sectors than the sex indus-
try. 

THB for labour exploitation may also be detected in the context of dealing with illegality, in-
volving a large number of authorities with various specific aims and powers. This means that 
the multidisciplinary intervention teams11 dealing with, for example, illegal employment 
may also spot indications of THB. Many of their checks, after all, are carried out in sectors 
that are sensitive to exploitation. 

IND staff may also provide information on indications of THB.12 The IND does not have 
any internal instructions on this, however. Because people involved in asylum proceedings 
can be victims of THB, and because the IND increasingly has to deal with foreign nationals 
who first of all apply for asylum and then indicate that they are victims of THB, the IND is 
now paying greater attention to THB in the asylum procedure.  

Assistance bodies and interest organisations can also help identify cases of THB. Some non-
governmental organisations (NGOs) pass on signs of possible THB to the police (anony-
mously). Also in relation to exploitation outside the sex industry, NGOs – particularly those 
in contact with people who are vulnerable in employment situations – can contribute to-

                                                                      
9 This information is drawn from de Baets, 2002 and the Centre for Equal Opportunities and Opposition to 

Racism, 2005. 
10 Article 433, quinquies, of the Belgian Criminal Code, on putting someone to work in degrading circumstances. 
11 Intervention teams involve collaboration between the Tax Administration, the Social Insurance Bank, AI, the 

Social Security Agency (UWV), municipal authorities, the police and the P PS. The SIOD offers analytical 
support to the intervention teams. 

12 The information included here in relation to indications from the IND is based on a letter from the IND to 
BNRM dated 19 March 2007. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 94 

wards identifying cases of THB. One problem, however, is that fear of being deported from 
the country will often deter the undocumented clients of these NGOs from reporting ex-
ploitative practices to the authorities. Putting the individual client's interests first, NGOs will 
usually also not be inclined to pass information to, for example, the police or the AI about an 
illegal client who is a (possible) victim of exploitation. This attitude on the part of many 
NGOs can only be expected to change if the organisations are – and can be – confident that 
reporting exploitation is in the interests of the individual concerned. 
(Some) trade unions may also contribute towards identifying cases of this form of THB,13 
albeit that the unions seldom actually reach employees who fall victim to violence or physi-
cal deprivation of freedom through criminals. No trade union work can be undertaken in 
these circuits, because of safety issues. Trade unions may well pick up on signs of these types 
of excesses, which can then be reported to the police, the SIOD or the AI. Employee organi-
sations therefore need to become involved, as new partners in the chain, in the efforts to 
provide early signs of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. 

Identifying (possible) THB situations by private citizens 
The campaign entitled ‘Schijn bedriegt’ [Appearances are deceptive] was initiated throughout 
part of the Netherlands on 12 January 2006 by the foundation ‘Report Crime Anonymously’ 
[Stichting Meld Misdaad Anoniem (M.)]14 The campaign’s aim was to help clients of prosti-
tutes, and others directly or indirectly involved, to recognise signs of coerced prostitution 
and to report these to the police or, anonymously, to M. An animation film on THB was 
shown on the Internet and regional television in the context of this campaign. Articles were 
also published in the daily papers and in weekly and freely circulating papers. Leaflets and 
posters were also distributed in the participating regional police forces through, for exam-
ple, local authority offices, schools and municipal health services.  
In the first half of 2006, the campaign produced 78 usable reports of THB (by way of com-
parison, there were 42 in the whole of 2005).15 Eleven of the reports related to underage vic-
tims. Three of the other reports related to men and 64 to women. Investigations were initi-
ated in a number of police forces as a result of these reports. At various locations, these led 
to the discovery of (possible) victims and the arrest of suspects. An illegal brothel was also 
closed. A number of the ensuing investigations are still ongoing, so there may be even more 
results. 
As planned, the campaign was drawn to a close at the end of June 2006. At the time of writ-
ing this report, a possible follow-up is still under discussion. 

                                                                      
13 This has become apparent in the BNRM research into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry, from 

interviews with directors of FNV Bondgenoten (trade union federation) and information from the CNV 
Vakcentrale (trade union federation).  

14 Commissioned and financed by the Ministry of Justice. 
15 63 reports contained enough concrete information to be usable and 56 reports resulted in follow-up action on 

the part of the police. 



INVESTIGATION  

 95 

Since exploitation outside the sex industry is also now punishable as THB, more individuals 
may encounter indications of the offence. Thus people working with asylum seekers or ille-
gal immigrants, front-line doctors, teachers, market operators, lawyers, neighbours and oth-
ers may notice and report signs of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. This 
does require a raising of awareness.  

5.4 Investigation of THB 

Organisation of police investigation 
The organisation of investigative work varies markedly from one police force to another. 
This is not surprising, as the forces are autonomous in this area. There are, however, teams 
specialising in THB (and prostitution) in many regional police forces, which undertake 
(smaller-scale) THB investigations in addition to their checks on the prostitution industry.16 
If a THB investigation is taking place on a larger scale, or appears likely, it is delegated to re-
gional investigation teams. The National and Supra-Regional Crime Squads can also under-
take investigations involving cases of THB.  

Police investigation in practice 
Various police officers indicate that the approach to THB leaves something to be desired. 
Not every case with ‘suitable grounds for investigation’ – or what police officers describe as 
‘sufficient evidence’ – is pursued. Police try to pass cases on to other regional police forces or 
the National Crime Squad without taking any action in the meantime – even though this is 
not permissible.17 There is not generally a great deal of willingness on the part of other police 
forces to take over cases. There is also uncertainty about which cases can be regarded as the 
responsibility of the National Crime Squad or not, so that cases are ‘sent’ to the National 
Crime Squad, whereupon some time may elapse before it is noticed that the National Crime 
Squad has not taken up the case – perhaps because of a lack of capacity.18 Cases are also 
passed from one department to another within the same police force, kept ‘pending’ in this 
way, with no action being taken. There may well be a THB team in a police force, but it may 
have been allocated to so many THB investigations that the team’s available investigative 
capacity is exceeded. This all results in stagnation, backlogs, and dismissal (by the police) in 
some cases. Potentially important cases are also reduced, more often than would be desir-
able, to ‘quick hit’ cases. It has been indicated, within LEM, that this is partly the result of the 

                                                                      
16 They go under different names. There are, for example, ‘THB Intervention Teams’, ‘Prostitution Control 

Teams’ and ‘Commercial Practices’ teams. 
17 The Board of Procurators General has clearly indicated that, as long as no decision has been taken to transfer a 

case, or as long as there is still not enough information available to make a decision on the matter, the 
responsibility for dealing with any observed manifestation of (organised) crime remains with whoever (first) 
observes it. This is designed to avoid a failure to act because a case ‘actually belongs somewhere else’ (Public 
Prosecutions Service, 2004, p.24). 

18 The fact that THB is often a national phenomenon (victims put to work throughout the whole country) or an 
international one (victims coming from abroad) may well lead to greater uncertainty on this point than with 
some other offences. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 96 

performance contracts that have been concluded, which contain agreements on the number 
of cases to be tendered to the Public Prosecutions Service. This results in a preference for 
quick-hit cases instead of taking on longer-lasting (complete) THB cases. It has also been in-
dicated that the disbanding of the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee ‘GOC teams’ means 
that fewer THB cases can be addressed by the police than was previously the case. 
According to the police, public prosecutors are also sometimes too reticent about THB 
cases. The police officers are also often disappointed at the penalties that are demanded. The 
PPS is undertaking research on the penalties imposed for THB.19 

By contrast, there are some police forces that invest a great deal in the fight against THB. 
According to the THB experts in these police forces, the following factors have a positive 
impact and result in adequate identification of THB, as well as the successful selection and 
completion of cases: 
– an agreement that THB can be dealt with immediately – because of the gravity of the case 

– and need not await the decision of a ‘selection team’; 
– an agreement that ‘selection teams’ should always make positive decisions on THB cases; 
– an agreement that any signs of THB will always lead to the start of a police investigation 

even if there is no report of the crime for the time being; 
– an agreement that individuals arrested by the Aliens Police in connection with illegal work 

or residence will always be interviewed, at which point attention will (also) be paid to any 
signs of THB; 

– an agreement that there will be ‘an investment’ in possible victims of THB, meaning that 
there will be proper assistance, adequate reception and accurate information; 

– an agreement that women in aliens’ detention, who might be (possible) victims,20 will be 
visited by certificated vice investigators, who will undertake a more detailed investigation; 

– good contacts with the victim assistance services; 
– a system-wide approach (see box, below) 
 

Investigation of THB: Sneep 
The police initiated an investigation in 2006 into a large group of suspects involved in major-league 
THB. Two of the main suspects, who are of Turkish origin, and their henchmen put many (at least 90) 
victims to work as prostitutes in various towns in the Netherlands and in Germany, using excessive 
amounts of violence in the process.21 The investigation into this group – codenamed ‘Sneep’ – includes 
some progressive elements and is an example of the programmatic approach to organised crime con-
templated by the Public Prosecutions Service (see also Chapter 7 on this). The work is based on a ‘bar-
rier model’, in terms of which the various barriers are distinguished that have to be overcome by 

                                                                      
19 Indicated by the Chairman of the Board of Procurators General in an interview with De Volkskrant, 28 February 

2007. 
20 Visiting all women appeared to take up too much capacity. 
21 According to R. Hopkins (interview with De Volkskrant, 17 February 2007) this was the group of perpetrators 

described at length in her book Ik laat je nooit meer gaan [I’ll never let you go again] (2006). She alleged that the 
police had already investigated this group back in 2003, but that the investigation was closed. 



INVESTIGATION  

 97 

criminals in order to introduce victims to prostitution (see Chapter 8). The investigation involves col-
laboration between various bodies, with each investigating the appropriate barrier. In addition to the 
various police forces, there is thus also involvement on the part of the Royal Netherlands Mare-
chaussee, SIOD, IND, Customs and the municipalities. The Public Prosecutions Service is coordinat-
ing the investigation and directing the various services. The investigation is being assisted and evalu-
ated scientifically. A lot of information is collected through tapping and observation (‘Article 27 aggre-
gation’, described later in this section), because many of the victims dare not provide official 
statements. Financial investigation is also undertaken, with facilitators – witting or unwitting accom-
plices – being included in the investigation. Because the victims were also put to work in the licensed 
sex industry, the intention is also to tackle the operators in question in terms of administrative law. At 
the time of writing this report, the investigation is still in full swing. 

Investigation of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 
The investigation of THB with a view to labour exploitation is still in its infancy. There are, 
however, investigations going on in various regional police forces. In 2006, one investiga-
tion into exploitation in another sector than the sex industry’ in a prosecution and convic-
tion at first instance.22 In this investigation the police collaborated with the SIOD. 
The SIOD (co-)initiated seven investigations into THB for exploitation in other sectors than 
the sex industry in 2005, one of which was successfully23 concluded in 2005.24 The other six 
investigations were either completed successfully (4) or discontinued (2) in 2006. In that 
year, the SIOD commenced five investigations into exploitation in sectors other than the sex 
industry. These investigations were still in the operational stages at the time of writing this 
report. 
The National Public Prosecutor’s Office for Economic and Environmental Offences (FP) is 
charged with directing special investigation services, such as the SIOD, in THB cases. It is 
also this office which determines whether a case should be taken up and whether it should 
be taken up as a THB case. The comments from the police, that public prosecutors are some-
times too reticent in relation to THB cases, were echoed by the SIOD in relation to the FP. 

Investigation using Article 27 aggregation25 
It often happens that THB victims do not dare to report the crime, or are unwilling to do 
so.NRM3 If they do, it often comes down to the word of the suspects against the word of the 
victims. This can complicate THB cases. Using a working method in terms of which all of 
the established facts – from the police and also from third parties – are ‘aggregated’, it is 
sometimes still possible to obtain sufficient proof of the crime in these cases. Three suspects 
were brought before the District Court of ‘s-Hertogenbosch by applying this ‘aggregation 

                                                                      
22 This was an investigation into illegal employment of Bulgarians in hemp picking, in very poor conditions and 

circumstances. The District Court in The Hague held that exploitation had not been proved (see also Chapters 
2 and 8). 

23 An investigation by SIOD is successfully completed if it results in an official report. 
24 The SIOD completed a total of 76 investigations in 2005, with 36 of these relating principally to organised 

illegal employment (SIOD, 2006, p. 7). 
25 Sources: Van der Wegen (2005), LEM, EMM. The term refers to Article 27 of the Dutch Criminal Code. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 98 

method' – and without the victims having reported the offence or made an incriminating 
statement. All three cases related to ‘loverboys’, with victims who did not feel as if they were 
victims and who were too fond of their ‘pimp’ to want to make incriminating statements. In 
two of the three cases, the suspects were nonetheless convicted of THB. The evidence that 
was led focused on witness statements by third parties and tapped telephone conversations.  
This type of investigation requires an investment from police and the PPS. The police for in-
stance indicated that a case without a report of the crime takes more time than a case with 
such a report. It involves, for example, dealing with an ‘unwilling’ victim in order to find out 
which witnesses should be approached or tapped and to collect sufficient (supporting) evi-
dence. EMM is making efforts to bring this method to the attention of police forces and to 
train police officers in its application.  

5.5 Investigations: the data (BNRM police study) 

This section contains some of the core data in relation to all of the THB investigations suc-
cessfully completed in 2004 and the number of victims who reported an offence of THB 
registered in 2005.  

Up to 2005, BNRM annually listed the number of successfully concluded investigations and 
reported on the characteristics of these cases. Two developments involving the police pro-
vided reason for discontinuing this practice. First of all, the police have to prepare, twice a 
year, a crime projection analysis [criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse (CBA)] for each of the six priority 
points in the fight against organised crime (including THB).26 The first full CBAs are ex-
pected to appear in 2007.  

Secondly, LEM is producing a ‘THB Police Force Monitor’ in 2007. As with the earlier po-
lice force monitorNMR3, this will provide an overview of the state of affairs in relation to the 
fight against THB and the bottlenecks arising as a result.  
The existence of the CBAs for THB and the Police Force Monitor has eliminated the need to 
continue the BNRM police research in its old format. It has been decided, for this and other 
reasons, that the BNRM will only undertake (additional) research into topics that are of cur-
rent interest. Because the publication of the CBAs and the Police Force Monitor is planned 
for 2007, the information they contain cannot yet be processed in this report. EMM has 
however provided a list of the number of submitted reports of THB (by victims and wit-
nesses) at the request of BNRM. The results are presented in this section. 

                                                                      
26 As instructed by the Board of Procurators General. 



INVESTIGATION  

 99 

5.5.1 Investigations into THB 

Table 5.1 contains an overview of the number of THB investigations, concluded and submit-
ted to the PPS each year,27 categorised according to cross-border or domestic THB or a 
combination of the two.  
For cross-border THB, victims are recruited abroad,28 and for domestic THB they are re-
cruited in the Netherlands. In all the cases, they are exploited for (among other things) pros-
titution purposes in the Netherlands. The number of cases involving a combination of these 
forms of THB, and involving recruitment of victims both in the Netherlands and abroad, in-
creased in 2004. Table 5.1 accordingly includes (for the first time) a separate category for this. 

Table 5.1 Investigations into THB completed each year according to THB type 

Year Cross-border 
THB 

Domestic 
THB 

Combined Total 

 N Index N Index N Index N Index 

2001 36 100 11 100 1 100 48 100 

2002 42 117 13 118 - - 55 115 

2003 31 86 10 91 1 100 42 88 

2004 33 92 24 218 3 300 60 125 

Total 142 - 58 - 5 - 205 - 

The number of successfully concluded investigations into THB achieved an all-time high in 
2004, following a relative slump in 2003. The number of investigations into domestic THB, 
in particular, showed a marked increase, both in absolute and relative terms.29 Three of the 
investigations (5%) related to a combination of domestic and cross-border THB. 

Type of sex work 
The research also covered the type of sex work undertaken by victims of THB. In all of the 
investigations that were concluded in 2004, this concerned prostitution.30 This was some-
times combined with (other) work in sex entertainment, such as pole dancing or striptease, 
but none of the investigated cases were confined to this type of sex entertainment. The vic-
tims were ‘used’ to produce pornography in three cases, but again this was combined with 
working in the prostitution sector.31 

                                                                      
27 The investigations were carried out by the police and the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee. A single 

investigation may relate to several suspects. 
28 Cross-border THB may also relate to the recruitment of individuals in the Netherlands for exploitation abroad. 
29 Percentage of investigations into domestic THB per annum (relative to the total number of investigations into 

THB in that year): 23% (2001), 24% (2002), 24% (2003) and 40% (2004). 
30 This was also the case in 2003. 
31 This fact is relevant because the punishable nature of THB was extended by the legislative amendment in 2002 

to cover exploitation for a third party, for example exploitation in the sex entertainment and pornography 
industries. It now seems that, in practice, no THB cases have been completed where the victims were exclusively 
exploited in those sectors. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 100 

 

Specific characteristics of the completed THB cases 
While there was no systematic inquiry about this, specific characteristics of the cases that had been 
listed sometimes cropped up in the interviews. For example, it transpired that one case had been re-
ported by a client and one by an operator of a sex business.  
Various victims (as it transpired in three of the investigations) not only had to undertake sex work but 
also had to conclude loans or undertake debts, with only the suspects deriving any profit from this. 

5.5.2 Victims 

Reports by victims in 2004 

Table 5.2 reflects the number of victims who reported an offence or provided a statement in 
the investigations that were submitted to the PPS. Victims who reported an offence, but 
whose cases were not dealt with or completed, are therefore not reflected here. Cases com-
bining domestic and cross-border THB are – by analogy with the methodology used in pre-
vious yearsNRM4 – allocated according to the predominant type of THB that had been com-
mitted.32 

Table 5.2 Reports and witness statements made by victims (in THB investigations sent to the PPS), per 
annum and type of THB 

Year Cross-border 
THB 

Domestic 
THB 

Total 

 N Average33 N Average 34 N Average 35 

2001 156 4,3 30 2,5 186 3,9 

2002 226 5,4 32 2,5 258 4,7 

2003 130 4,1 25 2,5 155 3,7 

2004 135 4,1 62 2,3 197 3,3 

Total 647 4,5 149 2,4 796 3,9 

Substantially more investigations were concluded successfully in 2004 than in previous 
years, but there was a decline in the average number of victims reporting an offence or a 

                                                                      
32 The underlying principle here was where most victims were recruited. In the ‘combination cases’ from 2001 and 

2004 (see Table 5.1) this occurred in the Netherlands, whereas the (combination cases) from 2003 involved 
mainly recruitment abroad. This therefore makes the numbers of investigations into domestic THB, for each 
year: 12 (2001), 13 (2002), 10 (2003), 27 (2004) and 62 (total). The numbers of investigations into cross-border 
THB, for each year, are: 36 (2001), 42 (2002), 32 (2003), 33 (2004) and 143 (total). 

33 Standard deviation and N 3.79 and 36 (2001); 5.78 and 42 (2002); 4.70 and 32 (2003); 1.84 and 33 (2004); 4.61 and 
143 (total) respectively. 

34 Standard deviation and N 1.57 and 12 (2001); 2.44 and 13 (2002); 2.51 and 10 (2003); 3.68 and 27 (2004); 2.00 and 
62 (total) respectively. 

35 Standard deviation and N 3.45 and 48 (2001); 5.32 and 55 (2002); 4.30 and 42 (2003); 3.10 and 60 (2004); 4.12 and 
205 (total) respectively. 



INVESTIGATION  

 101 

witness statement for each investigation. This decline can largely be attributed to the in-
crease in the number of investigations into domestic THB during that year. Generally speak-
ing, fewer victims were involved in these cases (Van Dijk, 2002). 

Underage victims 
Table 5.3 reflects the number of underage victims detected in concluded investigations, di-
vided according to the year when the investigations were concluded and the type of THB.36 

Table 5.3 Underage victims (in THB investigations sent to the PPS), per annum and type of THB 

Year 37 Cross-border 
THB 

Domestic 
THB 

Total 

 N Average38 N Average 39 N Average 40 

2003 13 0,41 7 0,70 20 0,48 

2004 18 0,55 16 0,59 34 0,57 

Total 31 0,48 23 0,62 54 0,53 

In the investigations in 2004 34 minors were found, 24 of whom (71%) reported the offence. 
The figures for 2003 were 20 victims, of whom 19 (95%) reported an offence. This increase 
for 2004 can be explained partly by the increase in the number of investigations in that year, 
but the average number of underage children per investigation also increased in 2004, at 
least in those investigations involving cross-border THB. For investigations into domestic 
THB, the average number of minor victims identified was slightly less than in the previous 
year. This may be because – as is often suggested – ‘loverboys’ wait until girls are 18 before 
introducing them to the (licensed) sex industry.NRM3 

Reports of THB in 2005 
At the request of BNRM, EMM prepared a listing of the number of reports of THB submit-
ted to the police in 2005. Where this was not possible, information on this issue was ob-
tained from the STV. This has allowed us to confirm the minimum number of reports of 
THB submitted to the police. The total in 2005 was 184. Not all of these reports were made 
by victims, with at least nine of them being submitted by witnesses.41 

                                                                      
36 They did not necessarily reported a crime or provide a witness statement. 
37 This information was only gathered from the year 2003 onwards. 
38 Standard deviation and N 0.84 and 32 (2003); 1.62 and 33 (2004); 1.29 en 65 (total) respectively. 
39 Standard deviation and N 0.68 and 10 (2003); 0.93 and 27 (2004); 0.86 and 37 (total) respectively. 
40 Standard deviation and N 0.80 en 42 (2003); 1.35 and 60 (2004); 1.15 and 102 (total) respectively. 
41 The listing does not include statements by the (victim)-witnesses. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 102 

5.6 International developments 

Both the police and the PPS are involved in international cooperation to combat cross-
border crime.42 This is of particular relevance in the fight against cross-border THB.  

International Police Cooperation Service  
The International Police Cooperation Service [Dienst Internationale Politiesamenwerking 
(DINPOL)] becomes involved as soon as an investigation includes collaboration with a for-
eign investigation service. It becomes the hub for the exchange of information on the inves-
tigation between domestic and foreign-based investigation bodies. The aim of the DINPOL 
brokerage function is to ease, as far as possible, the exchange of police information (via re-
quests for mutual legal assistance).43  

International legal assistance centres 
There are six International Legal Assistance Centres [Internationale Rechtshulpcentra (IRC)] 
in the Netherlands. They play a supportive role for incoming and outgoing requests for legal 
assistance, and also provide qualitative support and expertise in the field of international le-
gal assistance, including police cooperation and cooperation between judicial authorities. 
Because the IRCs are obliged to record every request for legal assistance, this also means 
that applications have to pass through the IRCs, even if the police or public prosecutor al-
ready has his or her own network (which is mainly the case with police, certainly in border 
areas). 

National Crime Squad  
The National Crime Squad [Nationale Recherche (NR)] has an important duty in dealing 
with complicated international requests for legal assistance, and provides capacity for inter-
national collaborative ventures, such as joint investigation teams. 

Joint Investigation Team44 
In its efforts aimed at an international approach to organised trans-national crime, the 
European Council created a facility for setting up a Joint Investigation Team (JIT).NRM3 
Preparations were put in hand in 2003 for setting up a JIT to investigate THB from Bul-
garia.45 This JIT project was halted in 2005, before an operational JIT could even be set up. 

                                                                      
42 Sources include: Perspectief op 2010 (OM, 2006), Politie in ontwikkeling. Visie op de politiefunctie, [Prospects for 

2010 (OM, 2006), Police under development. Views on the function of the police] (Views on the function of the 
police Project Group and Council of Chief Police Officers, 2005) and the Policy Agenda 2007 (www.rege-
ring.nl). 

43 The service corresponds through five communication channels: the Netherlands branch of Interpol, Europol, 
Bureau Sirene, the Dutch liaison officers abroad and the foreign liaison officers in the Netherlands. Liaison 
officers provide support for investigations undertaken by the Dutch police and PPS on foreign soil. The Dutch 
liaison officers based abroad have counterparts in the Netherlands. 

44 Source: Rijken (2006), LEM. 
45 Participating countries apart from the Netherlands include Belgium, Germany, the United Kingdom and (at a 

later stage) Bulgaria. 



INVESTIGATION  

 103 

The most significant reasons for its termination were gaps in the legislation in the participat-
ing countries and the absence of a suitable THB case for the JIT to focus on. The organisa-
tional structure was also too complex. Experience gained during this JIT project will be 
available to use if a choice is made to pursue investigation via a JIT at some point in future. 
Another JIT (into drug smuggling) was continued, however, and resulted in the conviction 
of a suspect in the Netherlands.46 The defence argued in this case that the public prosecu-
tor’s case was not admissible for prosecution, because the JIT itself and the information ob-
tained from it were both unlawful. The court did not agree.47 

Europol 
Europol has prepared an analysis of frequently occurring organised crime and current 
criminal networks in Europe. The results are set out in the report entitled EU Organised 
Crime Threat Assessment 2006 (OCTA).48 The OCTA is designed to provide a basis for estab-
lishing strategic EU priorities, and forms an important step towards an information-driven 
approach to organised crime at the European level. Priorities have been set within the 
Council of the European Union in relation to the OCTA. THB is one of them.49 The Neth-
erlands has also proposed in this context to start targeting THB more emphatically in its in-
ternational collaborative endeavours with other Member States. 
 

THB in the OCTA 
In addition to ethnic Albanian organisations, the OCTA mainly identifies Romanian and Bulgarian 
organisations as being involved with THB. It also reports that Chinese criminal organisations are fa-
cilitating illegal immigration and are involved in the systematic exploitation of individuals for em-
ployment and sexual purposes. THB, principally concentrating on sexual exploitation, is said to be the 
second most frequently occurring activity for criminal organisations, and second only to drugs. THB 
requires a complex organisation and is associated with facilitative offences such as document forgery. 
Criminal organisations specialising in the forgery of documents are sometimes deeply involved in 
people smuggling and THB. The OCTA has established that criminal organisations are often active 
not only in the criminal underworld but also set up legal businesses to use for the (partial) deployment 
of their criminal activities. For example, criminal organisations involved in THB operate travel agen-
cies, temporary employment agencies or theatre agencies. Violence is an intrinsic feature of THB, al-

                                                                      
46 The participating countries were the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. 
47 Rotterdam District Court, verdict of 11 August 2006 (LJN: AY6629). 
48 This is the first report based on a new operating method, in terms of which the emphasis is on a future-oriented 

(qualitative) assessment of organised crime in Europe. Earlier Europol reports mainly described the existing 
situation (in quantitative terms). This working method results from agreements reached within the Hague Pro-
gramme.  

49 The six priorities in organised crime are: 1. drug trading, specifically synthetic drugs; 2. THB and illegal 
immigration (meaning people smuggling); 3. fraud; 4. forgery of euros; 5. product counterfeit and theft of 
intellectual property; and 6. money laundering. A number of points for attention have also been formulated for 
four geographical areas. These include THB and people smuggling for South-east Europe. The Netherlands, in 
the Atlantic region, is associated in particular with the battle against synthetic drugs. A final and general point 
for attention relates to transportation centres, such as seaports and airports, which act as conduits into and out 
of Europe for the trade in goods, principally drugs. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 104 

beit that THB can also occur without the use of extreme violence. Reputation or appearances may 
mean that threats of violence are enough. 

International collaboration between border areas 
Police districts on the border also collaborate directly with the neighbouring countries of 
Germany, Belgium and Luxembourg.50 The aim is to tackle crime manifesting itself in these 
border areas on a joint basis. For the first time in history, THB and people smuggling have 
been prioritised in one of these collaborative ventures (NeBeDeAgPol). The opportunities 
for forming this type of collaboration were expanded in 2005 and 2006 respectively with the 
ratification of the Benelux Convention on cross-border police activity51 and the Convention 
between the Netherlands and Germany on cross-border police cooperation and coopera-
tion in criminal matters52. Further improvements to the collaborative effort can be antici-
pated when the Convention of Prüm53 is ratified. 

5.7 Points of attention and bottlenecks 

This section contains an overview of points for attention and bottlenecks in the field of de-
tecting THB which have been mentioned previously, and those arising from information al-
ready presented.  

Policy and organisation 
– In practice – unlike at the policy level – THB is not a matter of priority for every police 

force. 
– The Public Prosecutions Service sometimes appears to be too reticent in relation to THB 

cases. 
– LEM is proceeding with a new organisational structure. One element of this is that – 

unlike the previous situation – not every police force will be represented at all of the meet-
ings, but most of the meetings will be attended only by those forces who are playing a pio-
neering part. Because this implies that police forces who are tackling THB less intensively 

                                                                      
50 In ‘Arbeidsgesellschaft NeBeDeAgPol’ (with Germany and Belgium) and in ‘Kodag-Nort’ and ‘Kodag-Mitte’ 

(with Germany). 
51 Convention between the Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Kingdom of Belgium and the Grand Duchy of 

Luxembourg on cross-border police activity; Luxembourg, 8 June 2004, 21 (2004) no. 1, effective from 01.06.06, 
Treaties Series. 2005, 35. 

52 Convention between the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Federal Republic of Germany on cross-border 
police cooperation and cooperation in criminal matters, Enschede, 2 March 2005. 4 (2004) no. 2, Treaties 
Series. 2005, 86, ratified on 07.06.06, but not yet in force. 

53 The Convention between certain states on the stepping up of cross-border collaboration, particularly in 
combating terrorism, cross-border crime and illegal migration (Convention of Prüm) (T.S. 2005, 197) offers 
opportunities in particular for an intensified approach to cross-border crime. This convention will, for example, 
allow for the immediate comparison of an individual DNA profile with DNA profiles from the computer 
databases of the other associated member states with a view to assisting in identification and investigation. The 
same facility will be available for fingerprints and vehicle registers. The convention was signed by the 
Netherlands in May 2005. 



INVESTIGATION  

 105 

will be less likely to encounter this topic as often (except when actively involved in investi-
gations), there is a danger of them falling further behind. 

– EMM is dependent for its operation on information provided by the police forces and 
third parties. This information is not supplied effectively enough by all of the parties con-
cerned. On the other hand, EMM is not yet successfully fulfilling its allocated duties. 

– Police forces must continually make choices as to how capacity is allocated. Such choices 
do not always favour the fight against THB. Administrative enforcement of the prostitu-
tion sector also uses up capacity, and this is not universally supported by the municipali-
ties, as has been agreed. The result is that indications of THB are not investigated in certain 
cases, and investigations are limited to ‘quick-hit’ cases. 

– Police housekeeping in relation to information is a recognised point of concern. Tackling 
THB also suffers because of the (technical) obstacles to an exchange of information. This 
accordingly costs needlessly high capacity – because of the multiplicity of systems used – 
occasionally resulting in the matter being abandoned. However, technically perfect infor-
mational housekeeping is exactly what is needed to tackle the offence of THB, which is of-
ten cross-regional. 

– Despite all of the foundations being in place, international cooperation in the investigation 
of these offences has, as yet, scarcely got off the ground. 

– Despite proposals to this effect in the Additional measures for the NAM, there has not as yet 
been any check on what activities might be useful – in the field of THB for exploitation in 
sectors other than the sex industry – to ensure an increase in the number of people report-
ing indications of this type of exploitation, while contacts have only been sought with a 
limited number of new chain partners who can identify signs of this type of THB (see also 
§8.7.2). 

Identification and investigation 
– In order to adequately identify indications of THB, it is important for both citizens and 

employees, in all branches of those organisations that might have to deal with THB, to 
know what THB is and to be able to recognise victims. There is still a long way to go be-
fore this goal is achieved (see also §8.7.2). 

– The police do not always submit reports of THB to the PPS – contrary to the terms of the 
THB Guidelines. 

– When disposing of illegal employment cases by means of an administrative penalty, there 
is a hidden risk, as far as tackling THB is concerned, that no (more detailed) investigation 
will be undertaken apart from a penalty report, with an associated chance that the AI 
might be receiving and passing on limited amounts of information about abuse in illegal 
employment situations. 

 





 107 

6 
 Financial Investigations 

6.1 Introduction 

One of the subject areas to which BNRM has applied its available research capacity is that of 
‘financial investigations’. Human traffickers can earn substantial amounts of money from 
their criminal activities. Information is necessary in order to be able to confiscate these 
amounts, and this can be obtained by ensuring that investigations are not only tactical but 
also financial. In addition, financial investigations can provide (additional) evidence and a 
more detailed understanding of criminal organisations. Financial information can also con-
tribute to obtaining compensation for victims. At the same time, BNRM established that the 
police and the Public Prosecution Service (PPS) devote (too) little attention to financial in-
vestigations and confiscation.NRM3 

This chapter contains the research results in relation to financial investigations in cases of 
trafficking in human beings (THB), confiscation, and compensation payable to victims. The 
explanation of the research methods used can be found in Appendix 2. The research only 
covers information in relation to exploitation in the sex industry. 

Subjects dealt with include the concepts financial investigations, illegally obtained profits 
and confiscation, a number of developments (in terms of policy) relating to financial investi-
gations and confiscation, and the research findings on financial investigations, illegally ob-
tained profits and confiscation. Attention is also paid to the issue of compensation for vic-
tims. 

6.2 Financial investigations, illegally obtained profits and confiscation 

6.2.1 What is financial investigation? 

While there is a range of definitions of financial investigation, there is also a reasonable de-
gree of consensus about its main characteristics and usefulness. 
– Financial investigation relates to the deployment of financial expertise in a criminal investigation 

in order to collect and analyse (financial) information. 
Certain information becomes (more) significant if looked at from the perspective of finan-
cial expertise. In practice, financial investigations involve being alert during an investigation 
to information concerning cash and cash flows, goods and services supplied, and collecting 
this information actively, preferably from the start of the investigation. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 108 

– Financial investigation is not a new investigative method, but a different way of looking at and 
thinking about information. 

– The usefulness of financial investigation goes beyond the (enabling of an easier) confiscation of 
any illegally obtained profits. 

Financial investigation can also provide (additional) evidence of criminal activities, and can 
therefore be of use in prosecution of suspects. Carrying out financial investigations also po-
tentially offers a greater understanding of the size of a criminal network, the (new) suspects 
who may be involved, the legal sectors involved, the hierarchy of a criminal network, crimi-
nal operating methods and particular types of crime (Hoogenboom et al., 1995; Van Kop-
pen, 1996; Nelen & Sabee, 1996; Secherling & Nelen, 1997; Pheijffer et al, 1997). 
– Financial investigation is not confined to financial-economic offences, but can be applied to many 

areas of crime. 
Financial investigations are often associated with the battle against financial-economic 
crime, such as fraud and money laundering (Hoogenboom et al., 1995; Faber & Van Nunen, 
2002). They can also be applied, however, when combating other offences. 

6.2.2 What are illegally obtained profits? 

Illegally obtained profits represent the amount by which an individual's assets are increased 
as a result of a criminal offence.1 This can be calculated in two different ways: either on a 
transactional basis or via a cash position/asset comparison. The transactional basis involves 
establishing what financial returns for the suspect(s) each (criminal) activity has produced. 
In a cash position/asset comparison – to put it briefly – opening assets and lawful income are 
compared with expenses and closing assets on the date of arrest, whereby unaccountable 
expenditures and assets may be established and possibly classified as illegally obtained prof-
its. In matters involving THB calculation on a transactional basis is frequently used. In such 
cases, it is calculated how much a victim paid to the human trafficker(s), and this informa-
tion can also be used by the victim when she claims compensation. The cash position/asset 
comparison, however, also has advantages, for example in cases where the police can only 
confirm some of the victims or some of the THB activities that have been committed.2 In 
such cases, calculation on a transactional basis might provide a (serious) under-estimate of 
the actual criminal profits. 

In confiscation cases, there is no need for any precise knowledge of what the perpetrators 
have earned from their criminal activities. The illegally obtained profits can be estimated. 
Such estimates have to be substantiated, of course, and must be prepared as carefully as pos-
sible. If a reasoned calculation of the enrichment has been made, based on lawful evidence, it 

                                                                      
1 Along with any interest received on such an increase in assets (consequential profit). The illegally obtained 

profits can also represent the amount by which assets are not diminished, arising from cost savings. 
2 This is the case, for example, when victims are unwilling or unable to provide a statement, or cannot be found; 

this happens relatively frequently. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 109 

is up to the party concerned to refute the calculation. The court can reallocate the burden of 
proof between the public prosecutor and the party concerned. 
Establishing or estimating illegally obtained profits is not always straightforward. There fre-
quently is a lack of information. It is apparent from case law that data covering a limited part 
of the period when the crimes were committed can be extrapolated to the entire period. In 
THB cases, this means that if it is known what a victim earned in one month, this amount 
can be multiplied by the total number of months during which she was exploited. 

6.2.3 What is confiscation?3 

Confiscation is the deprivation of illegally obtained profits. A public prosecutor must indi-
cate during the trial whether or not a claim for confiscation is being lodged. The confiscation 
claim itself must be made within two years after the verdict at first instance in the underlying 
criminal case.4 The confiscation claim is dealt with in separate proceedings (so not within 
the original criminal proceedings).5 The court can impose a confiscation order on the con-
victed party, obliging him or her to pay the illegally obtained profits to the State. The confis-
cation is based on Article 36e Dutch Criminal Code. 

The following decisions are made at the confiscation hearing: 
– establishing which offences have resulted in illegally obtained profits; 
– estimating the amount of the enrichment (calculation of the illegally obtained profits); 
– determining the size of the obligation for payment. 

The court may order a more detailed financial investigation. Appeal and cassation can be in-
timated against the verdict on confiscation itself.  
When establishing the illegally obtained profits, the court must take into account any judi-
cially established claim by a disadvantaged third party.6 
 
Various studies show a significant discrepancy between the amount of illegally obtained profits 
claimed and the amount actually imposed by the courts (Meloen et al., 2003; SVB forensic business ex-
perts & investigators, 2004). One possible factor here is that the courts not only have to estimate the 
illegally obtained profits, but also have to establish the amount that the party concerned must pay to 
the State, and this latter amount is partly determined by his ability to pay. It also appears that the courts 
find it difficult to pass sentence on the accused in both the criminal prosecution and the confiscation 

                                                                      
3 Information in this section is based on the Confiscation Practice Book [Praktijkboek Ontneming (Punt, 2003)] 

and the Confiscation Manual [Leerboek Ontneming (Police Academy, 2004)], unless otherwise stated.  
4 The obligation to pay a sum of money to the State, representing confiscation of illegally obtained profits, can 

even be imposed if the party concerned was not convicted for the offence giving rise to the enrichment. In such 
cases there have to be enough indications that he did commit the offence. In practice, however, confiscation 
generally follows a conviction. Confiscation is only possible if the estimated illegally obtained profit amounts to 
€500 or more. 

5 But it is possible to deal with the confiscation case immediately after the prosecution. 
6 The disadvantaged third party is someone who has suffered direct disadvantage, i.e. a victim. As it happens, this 

cannot always be implemented in practice because of problems of sequencing. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 110 

proceedings, because imposing a confiscation sanction is viewed as an accumulation of punishments 
(SVB forensic business experts & investigators, 2004). Veldhuijzen (2003) points out that the public 
prosecutor frequently reduces the claim at the hearing. 
The amount ultimately confiscated is often lower still, primarily because only a small percentage of the 
claims are secured by a pre-judgment seizure of property (Verrest & Buruma, 2006). Van de Bunt 
(2004) points out that problems surrounding confiscation are not unique to the Netherlands. 

Execution of a confiscation sanction commences once it has become irrevocable, and is 
delegated to the Central Judicial Collection Bureau [Centraal Justitieel Incasso Bureau (CJIB)]. 
If there are concurrent claims, the sequence of execution gives preference to the claim by the 
victim (Article 36f Dutch Criminal Code), followed by the monetary fine and then any con-
fiscation sanction that may have been imposed. It is not unusual for a few years to pass be-
tween the start of the police investigation and an initial letter from the CJIB to the accused. 
This is because confiscation can only take place once the verdicts in both the confiscation 
case and the underlying criminal prosecution have become irrevocable. 

A criminal’s assets may be affected in ways other than a confiscation sanction. The ones of 
relevance to THB are: 
– Monetary fine. 
A monetary fine of the fifth category can be imposed for committing THB (the maximum 
here is €67,000 since the start of 2006). There is not necessary that the crime has resulted in 
any enrichment. 
– Settlement. 
Without the involvement of the court, the Public Prosecution Service can enter into a set-
tlement with the accused for payment of a sum of money (or transfer of property) to the 
State, representing (full or partial) confiscation of the estimated illegally obtained profits. 
This would be followed by a prosecution, but not by a confiscation case. This can be of in-
terest to the public prosecutor if, for example, it proves impossible to establish the where-
abouts of the suspect’s assets. 
– Declaration of forfeiture. 
Property can be declared forfeit if it is directly related to the offence that has been commit-
ted. This would, for example, include property acquired as a result of the criminal offence. 
Financial benefits from criminal offences are not available for forfeiture declarations. They 
are supposed to be appropriated through confiscation. Forfeiture declarations are applied 
relatively infrequently (Nelen & Sabee, 1998). 
– Obligation for payment to the victim (compensation order). 
The court can oblige the convicted party to pay the State a certain sum for the benefit of the 
victim (Article 36f Dutch Criminal Code). The compensation sanction is explained in 
greater detail in Chapter 3 (Victims). 
Targeting criminals via the Tax Administration is an alternative to confiscation. The advan-
tages and disadvantages of this are discussed in §6.4.3. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 111 

6.3 National (policy) developments in the area of financial investigations 
and confiscation 

6.3.1 Developments in the area of financial investigations 

Increasing interest in confiscation and financial investigations 
Interest in confiscating the proceeds of crime showed a marked increase from the end of the 
1980s, early 1990s. The statutory support for this was refined and extended. The Financial 
Investigations Project – directed by the Financial Investigations Steering Group – was set up 
in 1996 with the remit of making financial investigations an integral element of the en-
forcement system. The project ended after five years, with the results being described as 
‘disappointing’ (Faber & Van Nunen, 2002, p.476). 
Respondents from the police and the PPS, in particular, felt that in practice financial investi-
gation is equated too much with the battle against financial-economic crime. While it is clear 
that financial investigations form a valuable addition to the existing set of instruments, this has 
not yet ‘permeated to the police shop floor’ according to Faber and Van Nunen (2002, p. 477). 

Financial Investigation Expert Group 
The Dutch Police initiated the Financial Investigation Expert Group in 2005. The Expert 
Group also aims to make financial investigations an integral element of the enforcement 
system and the ‘standard’ investigation process. Financial investigations have to become a 
standard component of every police investigation. 

Reporting of Unusual Transactions7 
Since the introduction of the Reporting of Unusual Transactions Act [Wet melding ongebrui-
kelijke transacties (Wet MOT)] in 1994, institutions are obliged to report unusual transac-
tions to the Centre for Reporting Unusual Transactions [Meldpunt Ongebruikelijke Transac-
ties].8 Those obliged to submit reports include financial service providers (such as banks, in-
surance companies and financial transaction offices, as well as casinos), traders in high-value 
property and certain professional bodies (such as lawyers and estate agents). A transaction is 
‘unusual’ if it fulfils one or more of the criteria on an official list of criteria. The number of 
unusual transactions classified as suspicious and referred to the police in 2005 amounted to 
38,000 (21% of the total number of reports). These transactions involved 1.1 billion euros. 

Financial investigations in THB cases 
The Human Trafficking Instruction indicates that financial investigation should be a standard 
element of investigations into THB. The National Expert Group on Trafficking in Human 
Beings [Landelijke Expertgroep Mensenhandel (LEM)] also wants to encourage financial in-

                                                                      
7 Source: Ministry of Finance website (www.minfin.nl). 
8 The MOT office was subsumed within the Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU-NL) on 1 January 2006; this is part 

of the KLPD. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 112 

vestigation in THB cases. A manual on financial investigations in THB cases was developed 
for this purpose in 2005, containing standard questions and forms, focusing specifically on 
the offence of THB. 

6.3.2 Developments in the area of confiscation 

The PPS has applied a proactive policy on confiscation since 1993. The possibilities for re-
covering criminal assets were substantially extended in 1993 with the introduction of the 
Liberalisation of Asset Transactions Act [Wet verruiming vermogenstransacties] (Article 36e 
Dutch Criminal Code). 
In the long-range plan entitled ‘Prospects for 2010’, the PPS indicates that the legislation on 
confiscation has not yet proved to be an outright success, and it announces some improve-
ment measures. 
 
SVB forensic business experts & investigators (2004) looked into how the confiscation legislation 
works in practice.9 The result was a summary of factors of success and failure, coincided with the fac-
tors mentioned in earlier publications.NRM3 One factor was that the police and Public Prosecution Ser-
vice prioritise the underlying offence. Confiscation does not yet have a clear position in the investiga-
tion and prosecution processes. The focus on confiscation also diminishes as soon as the investigation 
of the underlying offence has been completed. The result is that financial investigators are brought in 
too late, or are not involved in tactical consultations. It also implies that often too little attention is paid, 
at the planning stages for investigations, to what is required for confiscation. 
Furthermore, it appears that investigations for confiscation without any realistic chance of success are 
prolonged for too long a time period. The claims submitted to the courts are sometimes not suffi-
ciently clear. There is a lack of expertise and capacity among all of the parties concerned. It also hap-
pens that financial investigators are instructed to do work that could be done just as well by tactical in-
vestigators, and they are not always well managed. 

The confiscation standard 
In February 2002, the Chairman of the Board of Procurators-General informed the chief 
public prosecutors that a claim for confiscation should in principle be lodged in any case 
worthy of confiscation involving the more serious offences – which include THB cases. 
More recent plans propose efforts to limit confiscation to major cases that are dealt with by 
confiscation prosecutors, with higher monetary fines in the more minor cases. This latter so-
lution is more straightforward and imposes less of a burden on the financial investigation 
capacity of the police and the special investigation services. 

New Confiscation Instruction 
The Board of Procurators-General issued a new Confiscation Instruction, effective from 1 
March 2005. This Instructions also considers the position of disadvantaged third parties: if 

                                                                      
9 This was based on four major and four lesser confiscation cases. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 113 

there are illegally obtained profits and there is a disadvantaged third party, the PPS should in 
principle always lodge a claim for confiscation.10 

BOOM 
The PPS Criminal Assets Confiscation Bureau [Bureau Ontnemingswetgeving Openbaar Min-
isterie (BOOM)] was founded in 1996. The duties of BOOM include the development of ex-
pertise for the PPS, the provision of advice and support to individual public prosecutors in 
relation to confiscation cases and policy-oriented support for the Board of Procurators-
General. 

International confiscation 
Criminals also conceal their assets abroad, for example in countries where legislation and 
organisation in relation to confiscation is not yet particularly advanced. Seizing these assets 
is patently important in the battle against crime, but it is not straightforward. Though there 
is adequate political support for this topic at both national and international level, few posi-
tive developments can yet be seen in terms of implementation (Moors & Borgers, 2006). 
BOOM has indicated that it wants to focus more on international confiscation and, with this 
in mind, has jointly set up the Camden Asset Recovery Inter-Agency Network (CARIN), an 
informal network of experts on confiscation from 34 countries, who can be consulted in 
cases where foreign assets have to be recovered. 

6.4 Results of BNRM police study: financial investigations 

6.4.1 Financial detection methods 

Table 6.1 provides an overview of (financial) detection methods used – so far as known 
among the respondents – in the 60 successfully completed police investigations into THB in 
2004. 

Table 6.1 (Financial) detection methods in THB police investigations 
Detection methods N1 Financial detection methods N2 % 

(van N1) 
% (of all 60 in-
vestigations) 

Interview suspect(s) 60 
Interview suspects about income, expenses, 
possessions 

55 92% 92% 

Interview victim(s) 59 Interview victims about income/proceeds? 54 92% 90% 

Search (of premises) 42 Pay attention to financial information  34 81% 57% 

                                                                      
10 If the disadvantaged third party lodges a personal civil claim with the civil court, and this is at least equivalent to 

the calculated illegally obtained profits, then a confiscation claim is not submitted. In the event that the 
disadvantaged third party proceeds with a civil claim then, as far as possible, information should be provided to 
the disadvantaged third party to support his or her civil claim. If the illegally obtained profits are larger than the 
disadvantage suffered by the third party, the balance is claimed by way of confiscation. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 114 

Telephone tap 37 
Focus on financial information in tapped 
conversations 

32 87% 53% 

Interview witness(es) 60 
Interview witnesses about financial informa-
tion 

27 45% 45% 

 Continuously pay attention to cash flows 46 77% 

 Audit of suspects’ payment transactions 30 50% 

 Collect financial information abroad 7 12% 

In the majority of the cases (see the final column) the suspects and victims were asked finan-
cial questions and there was a continuing watchfulness for cash flows. It is also clear that a 
search or telephone tap was not always used, but when it was, a large majority of these cases 
also involved scrutiny of financial information (see second last column). Interviews of wit-
nesses on financial aspects as well as checking on suspects’ payment transactions occurred in 
(almost) half of the cases. Collecting financial information from abroad occurred relatively 
infrequently. 
The investigative methods mentioned above will be discussed in greater detail below. 

Interviews of suspects  
Those suspected of THB generally either insist on their right to remain silent or deny that 
they have committed the offence, thus giving nothing away about the relevant financial as-
pects. If they admit having received money, they generally claim that the victims gave them 
the money voluntarily. Still, there are good reasons for putting financial questions to sus-
pects. In some investigations the suspects did provide statements.11 Sometimes this did not 
happen until the suspect was confronted with unexplained assets or other evidence of the al-
leged offence, such as duplicate financial records. 

Interviews with victims 
Interviewing the victim is often one of the first elements in a THB investigation. It provides 
an initial picture of how the offence was committed and who the (possible) perpetrators 
might be. Questions on financial aspects can also be posed. A number of questions are in-
cluded for this purpose in the Manual on Financial Investigations in Human Trafficking 
Cases [Handleiding financieel rechercheren in mensenhandelzaken] issued by the National Hu-
man Trafficking Expert Group (LEM) (2005). 
 

Financial questions to victims of THB to assist in calculating the financial profit 
- How many women are working or have worked for the suspect? 
- Who are these women, what are their names, where do they live, etc?  
 

                                                                      
11 So far as we are aware, ‘financial questions’ were put to suspects in 55 investigations. In 24 of these cases, the 

suspect denied involvement or failed to cooperate, and in 14 of them the suspect provided a statement (albeit 
sometimes brief). In 17 of the investigations, information was no longer available on what had been disclosed in 
the ‘financial interview’ of the suspect. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 115

Timeline  
- How long has the situation been going on? (Preferably as accurate as possible, with definite dates) 
- Until when did the situation continue? 
- How many days a week did the woman work? 
- Did the woman also work during her monthly periods? 
- Did she work throughout the entire period, or was there a holiday/break? 
- How many days did the woman work in total? 
 
Earnings 
- How many hours on average did the woman work each day? 
- How many clients on average did the woman have each day? 
- Were any records kept (for example notes or text messages) on how many clients she had each day? 
- What were the average earnings per client? 
- What were the average earnings per day? Is this figure net (excluding the costs of rooms, condoms, 

lingerie, etc) or gross (with these costs still to be deducted)? 
- What proportion did she have to hand over, or did she have to hand over the whole amount? 
- When and how did she have to make these payments? 
- Could she use the remaining money herself (was it kept by someone or somewhere)? 
- What did she do with it/how did she spend it (bank deposits; which bank)? 
- How much in total did the victim earn for the suspect or pay to him? 
 
Costs 
- What did the costs amount to each day? (room rental... per day (or part), condoms... per day, etc) 
- Who paid these costs? 
- Did the suspect incur any other costs, for example hiring someone for protection/to pass on mes-

sages/to supervise matters? 
 
Other 
- Does the suspect have income apart from his prostitution income, such as social benefits/drug deal-

ing income, etc? 
- Is it known what the suspect did or bought with the earnings he received? 
- Does the suspect have any assets (house, car, bank balance, cash) and where are they? 
 
Source: the National Human Trafficking Expert Group Manual for Financial Investigations in Human Trafficking Cases 
(2005). The questions are aimed at calculating the illegally obtained profits. Some of them can also be put to suspects. 

The BNRM study seems to show that it is extremely important to ask these questions. In 25 
investigations the statement of the victim(s) – sometimes in combination with other infor-
mation – allowed for a calculation of the illegally obtained profits. In nine investigations, 
where there was a financial gain and the victims were also questioned extensively on the sub-
ject, this was not the case.12 Sometimes the victims were unable to provide a statement (they 

                                                                      
12 As far as the other 26 cases are concerned, no illegally obtained profits was disclosed (4), no or insufficient 

questions were asked about illegally obtained profits (16), it could not be established what questions, if any, 
were asked or what victims said about the matter (5), or the victims did not want to make a statement or an 
official report (1). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 116 

no longer remembered the information or could not reproduce it, occasionally because of 
addiction), and sometimes they did not want to do so, for example from fear of the conse-
quences or because of a special attachment to the trafficker-‘loverboy’. In a few cases inter-
viewing victims on the financial aspects of the case was also important for evidential pur-
poses and for assessing the suspect's asset position. 

Search (of premises) 
When a search took place this quite often led to assets or information about them and/or 
other valuable financial information.13 These assets included money, valuables or other 
pointers towards assets such as bank account numbers, bank statements and evidence of 
money transfers. The discovery of assets is also important because a pre-trial seizure can 
also be imposed on them as a precursor to confiscation (see §6.5.2). 
In six investigations (duplicate) financial records were found during searches, showing 
amongst other matters which women or victims had worked at which times and the profit 
derived from them. Such a discovery is of major significance: it provides considerable in-
sight, the illegally obtained profits can be deduced from it, and it can be used as ‘hard’ evi-
dence in a prosecution and/or confiscation case. 

Taps 
In most investigations technical considerations regarding evidence play a part in the decision 
to tap telephone conversations: the intention is to demonstrate THB (for example through 
coercion). At the same time, financial information is picked up, certainly if a financial expert 
is involved in the investigation. Tapping brought to the surface useful financial information, 
generally on the suspect's assets, in a range of investigations. Telephone conversations be-
tween suspects and victims sometimes dealt with profits and costs incurred.  
It is through tapping that the ban on tolerating the transit of persons in cases that have been 
identified as THB makes itself felt: if the taps show that THB is going on, immediate inter-
vention is necessary in order to remove the victims from the situation. This is sometimes a 
factor in deciding whether or not – and how – to deploy this method when THB is sus-
pected. 

Witness interviews 
Witness interviews normally play a prominent part in investigations. Witnesses of THB are 
rather difficult to find, however, partly because victims are often kept in social isolation and 
also conceal their suffering. In cases where information was indeed successfully collected 
from witnesses or informants, this concerned, for example, information required to calcu-
late the illegally obtained profits or the (involuntary) payment of money. 

                                                                      
13 In nine out of the 34 investigations in which a search took place during which attention was paid to financial 

information, the results are not known. Searches produced valuable financial pointers in 18 of the investigations 
(72%), but not in 7 others. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 117 

Auditing payment transactions 
The auditing of suspects’ payment transactions generally occurs in cases involving a more 
intensive financial investigation. In these investigations, information is requested from fi-
nancial institutions, particularly banks, in relation to the products and services purchased by 
the suspect. 

Two (possible) aims of auditing payment transactions are to gain an understanding of (a) the 
cash flows and (b) the asset position of the suspect(s). The suspect's payment transactions 
were audited in 20 investigations, and the results are known.14 In nine of these cases there 
was nothing to show: no suspicious cash flows were found and the suspects appeared not to 
have any significant assets in a (Dutch) bank account. Various respondents indicated that in 
the prostitution industry funds tend to be cash and never end up being held by financial in-
stitutions. In six of the investigations, however, this investigative work revealed that money 
had been transferred abroad (see more on this at §6.4.2). 

Reasons for not auditing payment transactions were that it takes long and it is time-
consuming. It was frequently said that this would only be worthwhile if the anticipated prof-
its were substantial. This was not often the situation in the investigated cases. 

Collecting financial information from abroad 
Financial information was collected abroad in seven of the investigations. In many more in-
vestigations, however, indications of cash flows going abroad, or assets held abroad, were 
found. This means that not in all cases appropriate investigative methods were applied. This 
point will be explored in the following section. 

6.4.2 Collaboration and information exchange 

The PPS is in charge of the investigation, including the financial element. The leaders of in-
vestigation teams were asked how collaboration in this area actually worked. Inquiries were 
also made about potential other collaborating agencies, including the Tax Administration 
and the Social Information and Investigation Service [Sociale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdi-
enst (SIOD)]. The matters explored include the experience of collaborating with these bod-
ies as well as the cases in which collaboration with foreign partners was sought. 

Public Prosecution Service 
The respondents were divided about the directive role of and collaboration with the PPS in 
the financial field. Thus, in addition to some positive points, it was indicated that the PPS 
wants to achieve targets and is therefore unwilling to invest in (lengthy) financial investiga-

                                                                      
14 In a relatively large proportion of investigations (10), it was not possible – within the available time frame – to 

find out what the results of the audit had been. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 118 

tions, or does not act according to the principle (set out in the Confiscation Instructions) that a 
claim for confiscation should be lodged if the minimum estimate of the enrichment is €500. 

Tax Administration 
The 14 investigations were contact was made with the Tax Administration involved asking 
for information or providing information so that the suspect(s) could be made subject to an 
assessment by the Tax Administration. The latter usually happens if the financial investiga-
tion could not be completed successfully, but it is considered undesirable that the accused 
can simply walk away (in financial terms). When imposing assessments on criminals, the 
Tax Administration regularly uses financial information from police investigations (Van der 
Wegen, 2005). 
The benefit of ‘confiscation’ by fiscal means is its speed. A tax assessment prepared on the 
basis of police information can in principle be imposed immediately and collected within 
two or three days. This is possible for up to five years after the end of the relevant fiscal year 
(even up to 12 years for income from abroad), whereas in the case of confiscation proceed-
ings, this only has to be instigated within two years after a conviction has been pronounced. 
Also, because of its permanent relationship with citizens, the Tax Administration has a 
wider overview of the financial wheelings and dealings of suspects. And it is possible to 
charge tax on activities for which a suspect was acquitted in a criminal case. The Tax Ad-
ministration also has greater powers to compel suspects to provide information on their in-
come and assets. It can also reverse the burden of proof in relation to a suspect, meaning that 
the suspect has to account for the sources of his income/assets. A tax assessment can there-
fore be more effective than a confiscation. But there are also some objections (in principle) 
to this option. The Tax Administration does not give a detailed account of the illegally ob-
tained profits, certain countries refuse to supply information to the Tax Administration15 
and it is not the purpose of the Tax Administration to compensate victims of a criminal of-
fence (Van der Wegen, 2004). 
 

Interlude: the ‘Big Spender’ projects 
‘Big Spender’ projects were started in a number of regional police forces. They aimed at criminals and 
troublemakers who are manifestly living above their station. Enquiries are made as to how these – of-
ten young – men get hold of the wealth they flaunt so openly. The intention is to confiscate undeclared 
assets and, by doing so, to bring their allure for youngsters to a halt and discourage criminal conduct. 
Several regional police forces have signed agreements to this effect with other bodies, such as munici-
palities, the PPS, the Tax Administration and the Social Security Agency. 

SIOD 
One investigation involved collaboration with the Social Information and Investigation Ser-
vice [Sociale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst (SIOD)]. The police investigated the THB and 
the SIOD looked into whether the operators of the sex businesses where the victims had 

                                                                      
15 For this reason, these are the countries where criminals prefer to put away their assets. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 119 

been put to work had fulfilled their obligations as employers. This turned out not to be the 
case and they were therefore prosecuted for employer fraud. The SIOD investigation also 
resulted in a confiscation case. Both the police and the SIOD were pleased with regard to 
their collaboration on the investigation. Both parties achieved better results by sharing their 
knowledge and understanding. Also, if the suspects are exonerated from THB, they might 
still be convicted for employer fraud. Hence, a confiscation claim remains possible, so that 
the operators can be targeted financially. An additional advantage was that if in a court pro-
ceeding it is established that the victims of THB had been in paid employment, they can 
lodge a claim for (unpaid) wages. None of the victims in this case submitted a compensation 
or wages claim, however. 
 

Case study: SIOD collaboration 
Four human traffickers recruited women in various Eastern European countries, brought them to the 
Netherlands and put them to work in several sex clubs. The clubs were run by three owners, who were 
in league with the human traffickers. The sex club owners registered the victims with the Aliens Police 
and arranged an application for independent entrepreneur status (with the help of a lawyer). The vic-
tims were told that they could legally work in the Netherlands during the procedure, which was not the 
case. They were also told that the operator would deal with the payment of taxes and suchlike. 
The sex club owners and the traffickers were convicted of human trafficking and other matters. The 
idea arose to also prosecute the owners for failing to fulfil their obligations as employers, and it was de-
cided that the SIOD would investigate this. In consultation with the police, questions about the em-
ployment relationship were included in the interviews of witnesses and victims. This provided a lot of 
information that the SIOD could use. For this reason, permission was sought and obtained for active 
participation in the investigation. 
First of all, the SIOD collected information showing that the sex club owners could indeed be catego-
rised as employers, despite their steadfast defence that the victims were working in their clubs on a 
self-employed basis. The SIOD succeeded in refuting this by demonstrating that there were elements 
of control, employment and wages. To do this, it used statements from the victims and the sex club 
owners themselves. The control element was apparent from the fact that the victims did their work on 
instructions and that they could not personally determine when they could stop work. The employ-
ment relationship was established partly by the fact that the victims were only allowed to work in the 
owners’ clubs (whereas, as self-employed, they would have to have at least two separate principals). 
The wages element was apparent from the fact that the client did not pay the victims, but instead paid 
the barman in advance, and that arrangements were made about the work and payments (so that the 
victims could not themselves determine the prices). Nor were the victims registered as self-employed 
with the Tax Administration, they did not keep their own books of account and most were not regis-
tered as self-employed entrepreneurs with the Chamber of Commerce. 
Once it had been shown that the owners of the sex clubs were in fact employers, it was a simple matter 
to establish that they had not fulfilled their obligations as employers. Thus, for example, no employ-
ment agreements were reported, and no social insurance premiums were paid to the Social Security 
Agency. 
The illegally obtained profits were established, for two of the three club-owners, at €600,000 and 
€900,000 respectively, based on the SIOD investigation. A confiscation claim for these amounts was 
lodged. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 120 

International collaboration 
Indications of cash flows going abroad or possessions held abroad were found in 15 of the 
60 THB investigations.16 
The countries where the property was situated coincided with the victims’ country of origin 
(countries in Central and Eastern Europe, Brazil, Thailand and Nigeria), countries of origin 
of the suspects (Turkey, Germany), or countries with banking secrecy protected by statute 
(Luxembourg). 

Indications of cash flows to repositories abroad or possessions held abroad did not always 
result in an effort to follow the cash flows or confiscate the assets. 
No detective work on the foreign element was undertaken in eight of the investigations. The 
reasons suggested for this (sometimes in combination) were: 
– the indications were not sufficiently concrete (4 times);17 
– the illegally obtained profits were too low to justify this sort of effort (3 times); 
– there already was enough lawful and convincing evidence (3 times); 
– bad experiences with the country in question (2 times); 
– it takes up too much time (with uncertain results) (2 times). 

Seven of the investigations did involve efforts with regard to other countries than the Neth-
erlands. In six of these investigations, requests for legal assistance were issued to Turkey, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Romania, Thailand and Germany respectively.18 The results varied. The fi-
nancial investigation in Turkey got bogged down very quickly. One of the factors contribut-
ing to this was that the indications (relating to bank accounts and real estate) appeared to be 
inaccurate and incomplete. The other five countries collaborated well and provided the re-
quested financial information. A pre-trial judgment seizure was imposed in one country 
(Romania), on one of the suspect’s cars. This car – confiscated by Romanian local authori-
ties – disappeared without a trace. 

6.4.3 Dilemmas in financial investigation 

In the book Rechercheportret. Over dilemma’s in de opsporing [Investigation portrait. Dilem-
mas in Investigation], De Poot et al. (2004) provide an insight into the tactical investigation 
process and include an outline of the dilemmas which arise in these situations. Comparable 
dilemmas arise in connection with the financial investigation process. The first is the choice 
of whether or not to start a financial investigation. Then there are assessments, at set points, 
about whether or not it is justified to continue the investigation. Choices also have to be 
made as regards which financial detection methods should be deployed. These choices are 

                                                                      
16 This reflects a minimum, because in other investigations assets may also have been siphoned abroad. This was 

not always investigated by the police. 
17 This is often the case when only proof of money transfers is found. 
18 In one case no request for legal assistance was made, but police specialists investigated money transfers. The 

results are not known. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 121 

influenced by a number of factors, some of which are specific to THB. A summary and ex-
planation of these factors is presented here. 

Setting targets 
In this study, financial investigation resources were generally deployed with a view to con-
fiscation. No financial investigation was started if there seemed to be few prospects of a suc-
cessful confiscation effort. But financial investigation can still be worthwhile even in these 
cases, for example for collecting evidence. If it can be shown that victims have passed their 
money on to pimps, this can be used as evidence of THB. Intentionally or otherwise, finan-
cial investigation (also) provided evidence of the offence of THB in a relatively large propor-
tion of the investigations covered by the BNRM research. In addition, suspects’ assets (avail-
able for confiscation) could sometimes be traced, or financial investigation provided infor-
mation relating to the structure of the criminal organisation or the suspects involved. 

Absence of concrete indications of financial evidence 
The absence of (concrete) indications concerning cash flows or assets is an accepted reason 
for calling a halt to a financial investigation. This is the case, for example, if victims and sus-
pects fail to provide adequate statements on the finances, if money only changes hands via 
cash or money transfers, or if for some other reason the information is limited, inaccurate or 
incomplete. In fact, in these cases the illegally obtained profits can sometimes be calculated, 
but no more detailed investigation is made of the suspect’s assets. According to financial in-
vestigators, this latter aspect is also more difficult than establishing the illegally obtained 
profits. 

Nothing can be recovered from the suspect 
It is said relatively often that (more detailed) financial investigation is only undertaken if the 
suspect appears to have financial assets and if there have been provable illegally obtained 
profits. If this is not the case,19 the investigation is broken off or not started at all. However, it 
is not always thoroughly investigated whether or not the suspect has assets. It is sometimes 
assumed that he does not because he lives in poor circumstances. The question is whether 
this is correct: according to Meloen et al. (2003), criminals sometimes live on benefit pay-
ments and lead a frugal and unobtrusive existence, while they have siphoned off a great 
amount of money abroad. On the other hand Van Koppen (1996), for example, indicates 
that criminals are quick to spend money, so that they may not have assets per se, even if they 
surround themselves with luxury. 

                                                                      
19 This seems to happen relatively frequently: The suspect did not appear to have any assets in 32 (53%) of the 60 

investigations covered by this research. A number of these investigations did include financial investigation, 
sometimes to reach this conclusion and sometimes to achieve other aims. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 122 

Available time/capacity 
Sometimes a financial investigation is not initiated due to a lack of time or capacity. But even 
if the choice is made to undertake a financial investigation, the lack of time or capacity may 
mean that it is not actually carried out. 

Cash flows to repositories abroad 
Cash flows going abroad (or signs of them) are dealt with in a range of ways. Sometimes the 
financial investigation immediately ends there, and sometimes not, but then there usually is 
a critical consideration of the costs and benefits before a request for foreign legal assistance 
is made. Sometimes the country involved is a factor in this consideration. For example, it is 
known in advance that effort will be fruitless with some countries, whereas assistance can 
easily be asked for from countries within the EU. Expectations as regards the effectiveness 
of a request for foreign legal assistance do not, for that matter, always coincide with reality. 
One should not therefore be too ready to jump to the conclusion that it makes no sense to 
invest resources in relation to foreign countries. Indications of cash flows to repositories 
abroad can actually be used to calculate the illegally obtained profits. A plan aimed at confis-
cation can be embarked on without the suspect’s (foreign) asset position being clear. If nec-
essary, additional financial investigation can be ordered in a confiscation case. 

Ban on tolerating cases of THB 
The result of the ban on allowing cases of THB to continue is an occasional need for rapid 
intervention to remove trafficking victims from their situation. The suspects are generally 
also arrested immediately in these cases. The consequence is that the focus of the investiga-
tion team (necessarily) shifts towards proving the offence of THB, leaving no time for 
preparation and implementation of a financial investigation. When the suspects and victims 
are asked financial questions in these cases, the purpose is usually to gather additional evi-
dence of the commission of THB. Only if the suspect is found to have substantial assets will 
it be possible, at times, to shift the focus back to the financial side of the question.20 

No illegally obtained profits 
In some cases, the suspects will not have received any illegally obtained profits, or hardly 
any, generally because the victims have not worked in prostitution or only briefly.21 For this 
reason the decision is sometimes taken to forego any (further) financial investigation. 

Financial investigations start too late 
It is important that from the start of an investigation officers are alert to the financial aspect, 
for financial investigation is a process in which any financial information that is found can be 
used to determine new avenues for further investigation. A late decision to start financial in-

                                                                      
20 In 5 of the 60 investigations studied, the respondents indicated that having to intervene rapidly because of the 

ban on tolerating cases of THB was detrimental to the financial investigation. 
21 This was the case in 17 of the 60 investigations (28%) covered by this research, according to information from 

the respondents. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 123 

vestigation can therefore have a detrimental impact on the final result. It does happen that an 
investigation initially focuses on an offence other than THB (for example domestic vio-
lence), in which financial investigation appears to be irrelevant. As soon as it appears to be a 
THB case, the financial investigation gets underway, but this can already be too late. 

Lack of (available) financial expertise 
Financial investigation can be undertaken by financial investigators deployed by the tactical 
team. Financial investigation are also undertaken by tactical investigators, with financial in-
vestigators in a advisory role in the background (and, if necessary, to take over specific du-
ties). This means that the experts are further removed from the investigative work. The way 
in which financial expertise is deployed varies from one police force to another and one in-
vestigation to another.22 
Both a lack of financial expertise among tactical investigators and an absence of available fi-
nancial investigators can lead to no or poor financial investigations. As stated previously, the 
aim behind the Financial Investigation Project [Project Financieel Rechercheren] was to give 
tactical investigators enough background knowledge to undertake financial investigation as 
well. In the current research, however, it was heard regularly that the training course devel-
oped for this was inadequate, or the knowledge acquired had been forgotten. Many tactical 
investigators regard financial investigation as a specialism, and a job for financial investiga-
tors. Gaining some experience with financial investigation, preferably with positive results, 
can operate as a stimulus. 

Time-consuming collaboration 
Collaboration with (financial) bodies is cited in various publications as a bottleneck (for ex-
ample in SVB forensic business experts & investigators, 2004). In the BNRM study it was 
also indicated that it is time-consuming to take on board information from (financial) bod-
ies. 

Priority/motivation 
Various publications (including Faber & Van Nunen 2002; SVB forensic business experts & 
investigators, 2004) mention the lack of priority and motivation for financial investigation – 
with the police and the PPS – as a bottleneck. However, financial investigations were a stan-
dard element in many of the THB cases investigated for the current research, and there is a 
strong motivation to confiscate illegally obtained profits. In some regional police forces, it 
has even been agreed that financial investigation is to be a standard element in every THB 
case, whether or not it involves bringing in a financial investigator for the job. Interest in fi-
nancial investigation appears to be on the increase, given the fact that many respondents 
mentioned that it has now or recently become much better organised in their police force. 
Yet, further improvements in this area are possible. For instance, it is still often too easily 

                                                                      
22 In the BNRM research, financial investigators were brought into the team in 16 cases and the financial 

investigation was (largely) undertaken by the tactical investigators in 10 cases. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 124 

concluded that there is no sense in conducting any (further) financial investigation, meaning 
that it is not an obvious type of investigation in every case. 

6.5 Results of BNRM police study: illegally obtained profits 

6.5.1 Extent of illegally obtained profits 

The police calculated the illegally obtained profits for 19 suspects in this research, amounting 
to a total of €2,332,421, or an average of €122,759 per suspect. The highest amount a suspect 
earned from THB, according to the calculations, was €500,000, and the lowest amount was 
€1,000. Table 6.2 comprises an overview of the illegally obtained profits as calculated for 
suspects in THB cases for each year. 

Table 6.2 Illegally obtained profits, per year 

Illegally obtained  2001 2002 2003 2004 Total 

profits N % N % N % N % N % 

0 tot 25.000 8 53% 6 46% 1 20% 7 37% 22 42% 

25.000 tot 100.000 2 13% 2 15% 1 20% 5 26% 10 19% 

100.000 tot 500.000 2 13% 5 39% 3 60% 6 32% 16 31% 

500.000 or more 3 20% - - - - 1 5% 4 8% 

Total 15 100% 13 100% 5 100% 19 100% 52 100% 

The amount of illegally obtained profits derived from THB varies, with some earning a lot 
and others less. 
 

Profits from THB 
Human trafficking can have substantial returns. How much depends partly on the ‘popularity’ of the 
victim-prostitutes with clients. Also, income from prostitution fluctuates. Evenings with football on 
the TV are notorious. A prostitute making good earnings will make between €255 and €450 per night, 
according to Mens (undated). Majoor (2001) suggests that earnings can run to €11,350 per month. Bel-
ser (2005) estimates that a victim exploited in an industrialised nation earns $5,600 per month.23 It 
should be pointed out here that human traffickers can increase their earnings by selecting their victims 
and, for example, forcing them to work without condoms, to work many and long working days and 
never to refuse clients. 

6.5.2 Prejudgment seizure 

The PPS can arrange for prejudgment seizure or attachment of a suspect’s property even be-
fore there is a conviction (Article 94a Code of Criminal Procedure). This way the PPS wants 
to prevent suspects from removing their assets out of the State’s reach. If the court imposes 

                                                                      
23 This is about €4,730. 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 125 

a confiscation order or the conviction results in a monetary fine, then these can be settled, 
partly or fully, from the attachment.24 
Prejudgment seizures were imposed in twelve of the investigations, according to the current 
available information. For nine of these, it was possible to establish what was seized. In eight 
instances, the attachment affected one or more cars. The (estimated) execution sale value of 
the cars ranged from €5,000 to €76,000. Money in cash was attached in five investigations. 
The total executorial value for those investigations in which the value of the attachment 
could be established was €209,150, or an average of €23,239 for each investigation. 

6.5.3 Siphoning and money laundering 

What do criminals do with the illegally obtained profits not spent (straight away) on luxury 
goods, vehicles, a luxury lifestyle, an addiction or something else? Meloen et al. (2003) inves-
tigated this and discovered that criminals have a preference for holding foreign assets rather 
than Dutch ones. In the current research BNRM also came across signs of cash flows to re-
positories abroad. 

Another possibility is for criminal funds to be ‘laundered’, or provided with an ostensibly le-
gal origin. 
The current research only disclosed one case involving money laundering, so far as the in-
formation goes. A suspect bought a car paying in cash and arranged a loan on the same day, 
to give the transaction with an appearance of legality. 

6.6 Results of BNRM police study: confiscation 

The current research explored the extent to which claims for confiscation were lodged in 
THB cases, and what results these had. 

6.6.1 Confiscation in THB cases completed in 2003 

It was indicated at the time, for nine of the 42 successfully completed cases in 2003, that con-
fiscation proceedings were to be initiated.NRM4 The current research shows that a confisca-
tion claim was actually lodged in four THB cases.25 These cases are described here. 
 

Case 1: ‘Loverboy’ 
The suspect (of Surinamese origins) convinced his victims that he loved them. Initially he made a big 
thing of giving presents, but he turned out to be a pimp who did not shy away from violence and who 

                                                                      
24 The PPS can only impose a prejudgment seizure if there is a suspicion of an offence for which a fifth category 

fine can be imposed. This is the case for THB. 
25 In a fifth case, the confiscation claim was not based on illegally obtained profits from THB, but on the profit 

derived from trading in narcotics (the convicted individuals were guilty of both offences in this case). 
Confiscation claims were renounced in the other cases. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 126 

took all the money earned by the victims. He also turned his victims into drug addicts dependant on 
him for their supplies. Three victims, one of whom was a minor, filed official reports against him. The 
victims worked in window brothels (the minor using fake documents). It is not known whether the vic-
tims lodged compensation claims. 
The illegally obtained profits were calculated at €408,756. In the first instance the deprivation order 
was €171,322, and an appeal was lodged, at which stage the illegally obtained profits were established at 
€63,572 and – taking into account the suspect’s ability to pay – the amount payable to the State was 
fixed at €30,000. The accused lodged a cassation appeal in June 2006. That proceeding had not been 
completed at the time of writing this Report. 

 

Case 2: Romanian victims 
Four illegal Romanian women, one of whom was a minor, were discovered during a regular police 
check at a legal brothel. They indicated they were victims of THB and filed official reports. The sus-
pects were the couple running the brothel. The brothel was in the wife’s name, because her husband 
had a criminal record involving THB and would therefore not be able to get a permit. The victims 
pointed to him as the principal perpetrator. The couple had not personally recruited the victims, who 
did not claim compensation. 
The illegally obtained profits were calculated at €292,125 between the two suspects. The confiscation 
case had still to be dealt with at the time of writing this Report. 

 

Case 3: Bulgarian victim 
A Bulgarian man and his girlfriend recruited a victim in Bulgaria and brought her to the Netherlands, 
where they forced her into prostitution by the use of violence. They collected all of the money the vic-
tim earned. She was put to work as an escort. Administrative procedures were initiated against the op-
erator of the (licensed) escort bureau. It is not known whether the victim lodged a compensation claim. 
The illegally obtained profits were calculated at €12,000. In the first instance €5,500 was allocated, and 
no appeal was lodged. 

 

Case 4: The ‘loverboy’ case 
M was 24 years old when the regional police started investigating him, for suspicion of involvement in 
THB as a ‘loverboy’. At the same time a financial investigation was initiated by the Financial Investiga-
tion Bureau [Bureau Financiële Recherche (BFR)]. The aim of this investigation was to establish the ille-
gally obtained profits with a view to confiscating them. The investigation focussed on charting out M’s 
earnings and locating his assets. 
 
Location of assets 
Information from a range of sources, including municipal authorities, banks, the National Crime In-
vestigation Agency and the Social Services, was collated via a criminal financial investigation. The sus-
pect’s telephone calls were also tapped, he was put under surveillance and a request for legal assistance 
was sent to Surinam. The suspect himself – who had by now been arrested – said nothing about his in-
come and did not even want to listen to the questions. His ex-girlfriend, however, indicated that he had 
income from ‘the work the girls do for him’. By ‘girls’, she meant the women he had forced into prosti-
tution. These victims, seven in all, made formal statements confirming this. Assets were found follow-
ing searches at various houses. These included three rings (estimated at €655, new value €2,325) and a 



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 127 

€5,000 claim against an insurance company (in connection with a car crash). A pre-trial attachment 
was imposed on these. It later turned out that the insurance company never planned to make a pay-
ment, because of payment arrears and information withheld by the suspect. 
 
Request for legal assistance from Surinam 
A suspicion arose, based partly on a tapped telephone conversation between the suspect and his 
mother, that M was keeping the money he had earned in Surinam. The reason was that M had said, 
during a call to his mother, that he was arranging for ‘Grandpa’ to go to Surinam in order to deposit it 
in a bank account. The Surinamese authorities were therefore asked for legal assistance in the form of 
interviewing M’s grandparents and searching their house in Paramaribo. They were also asked to in-
vestigate any of M’s assets or possessions. There were no concrete clues, such as a bank account num-
ber. The investigation by the Surinamese authorities did not lead to any of M’s assets. The suspect’s 
mother was interviewed by telephone. She stated that this was just M’s ‘big talk’, and that not to be 
taken seriously at all. 
 
Calculation of illegally obtained profits 
Victim P stated that, in the period from 1 October 2002 to 28 November 2002 except for 2 or 3 days, she 
worked for M every day as a prostitute (a total of 58 days). Because P made contradictory statements 
about the amount of money she had earned, the calculation of the amount M received from P was 
largely based on an analysis of telephone calls. P, for example, had conversations with M and victim W 
about what she had earned each day. M personally told a friend on the phone that he was earning be-
tween €800 and €1,300 each day.26 A total of 23 calls contained information about P’s earnings. Based 
on these, it was estimated that she earned an average of €660 per day during the first period she 
worked for M, and thereafter €393 per day.27 Multiplied by the number of working days (29 in the first 
period and 26 in the second) the total amount M obtained from P was estimated at €29,280. Victim A 
estimated her own earnings: 4 days each week at €227 per day and 3 days per week at €454 per day. This 
victim worked for M as a prostitute for 4 weeks and therefore earned €9,075 for him. The income 
from the seven victims jointly added up to €252,010. 
To calculate the illegally obtained profits, the costs had to be deducted from the income. The costs in-
cluded petrol and depreciation (estimated at €18 per day),28 costs of a rental car (€26 per day), tele-
phone costs (estimated by those reporting the crime at €30 per day), costs of food and drink (estimated 
by them at €20 per day), costs for hash (estimated by them at €35 per day), costs for equipment such as 
condoms and lubricants (estimated at €5 per day), costs of working clothes (estimated on the basis of 
the reports at €37.50 per day), costs for going out (estimated on the basis of the reports at €26 per day) 
and overnight costs (in hotels, etc, estimated on the basis of the reports at €63 per day). The costs were 
always calculated at the daily maximum, for the suspect’s benefit. It was calculated that the daily total 
costs for one girl were €260.50. The illegally obtained profits obtained, for example, from victim P 
then worked out at €14,602.50. As regards three of the victims, including victim A, there were no ille-
gally obtained profits, after deduction of the costs. In other words, M had more costs for these girls 
than he received by way of income. The illegally obtained profits (worked out on a transactional basis) 
for all seven victims together amounted initially to €62,994.50 (there was a subsequent correction). 

                                                                      
26 At that point he had two girls working for him. 
27 The calculation distinguished between two periods with different earnings, because the victim’s official 

statement was quite clear on this. 
28 M took the girls to where they worked by car. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 128 

Disposal by the court 
The confiscation case came up in December 2003. M had already been sentenced to 30 months impris-
onment at that stage, but he had lodged an appeal. The Court of Appeal sentenced M to 18 months in 
prison. At the lawyer’s request, the confiscation case was stayed and continued a few months later, in 
May. This was because the lawyer wanted to interview two of the informants. The lawyer also objected 
to the way in which the illegally obtained profits had been calculated. All of the money had allegedly 
disappeared in costs incurred for the girls. Certain costs had allegedly not been included in the calcula-
tion. In response, a supplementary official statement was prepared by the financial investigator. After a 
closer scrutiny of the documents, he actually reached a higher figure for the illegally obtained profits, 
namely €89,665.50 (instead of €62,994.50). This was primarily the result of a recalculation of the ille-
gally obtained profits in relation to one of the victims (not included as an example in the previous para-
graphs). Costs had been incurred for a holiday that M had taken with the victim to Surinam. Assuming 
that he used this holiday to continue exercising his influence over her, or to keep her attached to him, it 
was established that these costs had to be deducted from the illegally obtained profits that had been 
calculated. Nonetheless, M’s illegally obtained profits from this victim were much higher than had 
been calculated initially. This amount was allocated at first instance and on appeal. M therefore had to 
pay the State €89,665.50. The victims made no claims for the money they had earned. It is not known 
whether they were informed about the possibility to lodge claims for compensation. The court did not 
avail itself of the opportunity to impose a compensation sanction (order for restitution). 

6.6.2 Confiscation in THB cases completed in 2004 

There are signs of the intimation of a confiscation sanction in 15 (25%) of the 60 investiga-
tions into THB successfully completed in 2004. The results for 2003, however, show that 
this does not always actually lead to a confiscation case. One possible explanation is that 
public prosecutors have to indicate, before their closing speeches, whether or not a claim for 
confiscation is being lodged. At that point, there is no need for a criminal profits report to 
have been prepared, or the illegally obtained profits to have been calculated, and the public 
prosecutor still has two years to decide on whether or not to lodge a confiscation claim. 
In eight of the 15 cases mentioned above, we do not yet know whether this will be happen-
ing. A verdict has been pronounced in seven of the cases. In five of these, the claim was 
(largely) awarded, while the outcome is not yet known in the other two. Victims have either 
lodged a compensation claim or been awarded compensation in four of these seven cases. 
One suspect had been the subject of a confiscation order for THB once before. He never 
paid up on the claim, however. In the new case against the suspect, the illegally obtained 
profits were calculated (€10,000) but no confiscation case was initiated, because he had no 
assets (just debts). 

6.7 Results of BNRM police study: compensation to victims 

This study included an enquiry as to whether the victims who had come in contact with the 
police during the THB investigations successfully completed in 2004 made any attempt to 
recover (part of) the money they had earned and turned over, or compensation for any in-



FINANCIAL INVESTIGATION 

 129 

tangible losses, for example through civil proceedings or joining a claim for civil damages in 
the criminal proceedings. So far as we are aware, this happened in 13 cases (22%). This is 
more often than in previous years.29 

Many of the persons interviewed indicated that it grieved them that victims hardly ever get 
any of their money back from human traffickers. Legislation appears to offer sufficient op-
portunities here, but they are little used by victims. The possible reasons include: 
– a lack of information on the possibilities for obtaining compensation; 
– a lack of legal support for and assistance to victims; 
– fear of the adverse consequences of a claim for compensation. Victims occasionally say as 

much to the police. A compensation claim can result in revenge, or in the money being 
claimed back by the perpetrators (once they are out of prison); 

– some victims told the police that they were happy to be rid of the suspect, and wanted no 
more to do with him, even in the context of a compensation claim; 

– victims (for example of ‘loverboys’) can still be so infatuated with the suspect that they do 
not want to lodge a compensation claim, to avoid losing his ‘love’ or because they feel that 
they are not victims and have handed over the money willingly. Victims who have given 
money to the suspect but were also allowed to keep some themselves, do not always re-
gard themselves as victims. Lodging a claim for compensation then requires a reversal of 
their thinking; 

– some victims may know that there is nothing to recover from the suspect (or assume this 
is the case). 

Some victims cannot cooperate effectively with compensation claims lodged on their behalf, 
for example because of drug addiction problems. 

6.8 Points of attention and bottlenecks 

– There is no general consensus as to what financial investigation entails. This complicates 
discussion of the topic. 

– With THB cases, the illegally obtained profits are often calculated on a transactional basis, 
possibly also in cases where a cash position/asset comparison would be more beneficial. 

– The amounts awarded by courts in confiscation cases are often much lower than the 
amounts claimed. The amount ultimately confiscated is often lower still. 

– In addition to confiscation, there are other facilities under criminal law for striking at a 
criminal's assets. An assessment by the Tax Administration can also be considered. 

– Indications of cash flows to repositories abroad or possessions held abroad do not always 
result in an effort to follow the cash flows or confiscate any assets held abroad. There is in-
sufficient international cooperation in confiscation cases. 

                                                                      
29 The number of investigations where one or more of the victims lodged a claim for compensation each year: 2 

(2000), 10 (2001), 4 (2002) and 3 (2003). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 130 

– In many THB investigations the illegally obtained profits can be calculated on the basis of 
statements made by the victims. 

– On the one hand, it is being tried in THB investigations to avoid (too) early confrontations 
with victims, so that the investigation is not hampered by the ban on allowing the crime to 
continue. On the other hand, early intervention, because of this ban, can result in stagna-
tion of the financial investigation. 

– Obtaining information from (financial) institutions is time-consuming. 
– The police indicate that, in certain cases, the PPS does not invest time in (lengthy) financial 

investigation and pays insufficient heed to the victims’ (financial) interests. 
– Financial investigation is often bypassed if there are no obvious prospects of confiscation. 

But financial investigation can be worthwhile even in these cases, for example for gather-
ing evidence. Also, the fact that the suspect has no obvious assets does not mean that he 
has none at all. Assets may have been sent abroad. 

– There is sometimes a lack of time, capacity or expertise for a financial investigation. Also, a 
late decision to undertake a financial investigation can have a detrimental impact on the fi-
nal result. 

– Victims appear to make little use of the possibilities offered by Dutch law in relation to 
compensation 

 



 131 

7 
 The Public Prosecution Service  

and Prosecution 

7.1 Introduction 

This Chapter contains an overview of relevant policy developments with regard to the Pub-
lic Prosecution Service (PPS) and the battle against trafficking in human beings (THB), as 
well as the results of (secondary) analyses of THB cases within PPS data for the period be-
tween 2001 and 2005. 

7.2 Policy developments 

The arrival of a new Procurator General (PG) holding the portfolio for organised crime has 
given new élan to the fight against THB within the PPS. The following section centres on the 
policy-oriented and organisational embedding of the approach to THB within the PPS, and 
describes some practical points of departures. 

7.2.1 Policy-oriented and organisational embedding of the approach 

In November 20041 the Minister of Justice and the Minister of the Interior and Kingdom 
Relations established six spearheads for the fight against organised crime over the next few 
years. Human trafficking is one of these spearheads. The Board of Procurators General en-
dorsed the same spearheads. This choice was reaffirmed in the PPS policy plan ‘Prospects 
for 2010’ [Perspectief op 2010] (2006), in the context of the programmatic approach to organ-
ised crime. The key to this approach is collaboration, so that crime will not only be fought 
through the criminal law.2 
 

Programmatic approach to THB 
The programmatic approach was implemented for the first time in relation to THB.3 By combining 
administrative prevention with criminal law repression, the PPS intends to remove any scope for THB. 
Whereas the developments in the PPS’s battle against THB, as outlined in the third Report, were pre-
viously aimed at increasing the focus on immigration offences, the emphasis in the next few years will 
be on the joint responsibility of administrative bodies and criminal law enforcement agencies. 

One of the agencies cooperating with the PPS in the battle against THB is the Immigration 
and Naturalisation Service [Immigratie- en Naturalisatiedienst (IND)]. The IND implements 
                                                                      
1 Parliamentary Papers II 2004/05, 29 911, no. 1. 
2 The programmatic approach is also based on the SIOD barrier model. See also Chapter 8. 
3 This became the case ‘Sneep’, which is discussed at greater length in Chapter 5.  



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 132 

the B-9 regulation, in terms of which victims of THB and witnesses who have reported this 
crime can remain available to cooperate in investigation and prosecution. A number of 
communication bottlenecks between the PPS and the IND as regards the application of the 
B-9 scheme were mentioned in the third Report. Recent consultations between the PPS and 
IND show that there are still bottlenecks: decisions not to prosecute are not reported to the 
IND; the PPS only provides the IND with the names of suspects and the PPS case number, 
whereas the IND works with the names of victims. The PPS and the IND are consulting 
about how to solve these problems. 

‘Prospects for 2010’ proclaims that there will be an extra effort to tackle the facilitators of 
THB, and that international cooperation will be strengthened. Another proposal from the 
plan relates to further specialisation in how to deal with major confiscation cases. 

The Board of Procurators General intends to reintroduce the subject of organised crime 
into the Planning and Control Cycles for the local prosecutors’ offices. This means that per-
formance indicators will also be designated for/also be applied the field of THB, meaning in 
turn that THB will be a compulsory topic on the agendas of all local prosecutors’ offices, and 
the Board will be able to follow developments in the fight against THB more closely. 

Participation in the periodic consultation among the public prosecutors (one from each dis-
trict) holding the THB portfolio is made compulsory in terms of the improvement pro-
gramme entitled ‘The Public Prosecution Service is changing’ [Het OM Verandert].4 Higher 
qualifications will also be imposed on these THB prosecutors and their support staff: a THB 
prosecutor will have to have had a number of years of experience, and (in-service) training 
and gaining in-depth knowledge will be made more mandatory in nature for both the prose-
cutor and the supporting officer. There will also be improved guarantees for continuity of 
THB prosecutors and support staff who have gained experience in the area of THB. 

The National Public Prosecutor [Landelijk Officier van Justitie (LOvJ)] for people smuggling 
and THB coordinates the combating of (international) organised THB from the National 
Office of the PPS [Landelijk Parket (LP)]. The LOvJ directs the National Crime Squad for 
this purpose, and maintains close contact with its Expertise Centre on THB and People 
Smuggling [Expertisecentrum Mensenhandel en Mensensmokkel (EMM), see Chapter 5]. 

7.2.2 Practical points of departure 

Improvements to information gathering 
The PPS focuses on improving the information gathering, in order to put the fight against 
THB on a higher plane though the programmatic approach. The aim is not so much to gen-
erate a larger number of THB investigations or prosecutions, but rather a more targeted ap-

                                                                      
4 Announced in a letter of 1 November 2006 from the PG, Organised Crime, to the principal public prosecutors. 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 

 133 

plication of available knowledge and capacity based on a better understanding of the prob-
lem.5 Relevant information at the strategic level is assembled into crime scenarios and crime 
scenario analyses.  
It is also worth mentioning in this context that the PG, Organised Crime, has indicated that 
he regards administrative reports (see also Chapter 5) as being important, so that relevant 
information is available for every agency involved in the fight against THB. 

The Instruction on Trafficking in Human Beings 
One important pillar for the practice of investigating and prosecuting THB is the Instruction 
on Trafficking in Human Beings [Aanwijzing mensenhandel], outlining the central points of 
the fight against THB. This Instruction replaced the previous Instruction on Trafficking in 
Human Beings and other forms of Exploitation in Prostitution with effect from 1 April 2006. The 
main reason for formulating the new Instruction was the entering into force the new THB 
provision in the Dutch Criminal Code on 1 January 2005. The previous Instruction only re-
ferred to sexual exploitation and was also out-of-date on several other points. 

The Instruction outlines how the investigation and prosecution of THB should be ap-
proached, frequently using mandatory terms. Thus, every (serious) indication of THB has to 
be reported to the public prosecutor and to the EMM, and such indications have to lead to 
investigation and, if possible, prosecution. There must be an active attempt at international 
collaboration, in case of cross-border THB. Also, investigations into THB should include fi-
nancial investigation and an investigation aimed at confiscation. The Instruction clearly 
shows the intention of the PPS to establish greater collaboration with other relevant agen-
cies, and the importance attached to pre-investigation and law enforcement in sectors and 
situations where there is a significant risk of THB. For this reason an appendix is attached to 
the Instruction, containing a list of indicators of THB that can be used ‘in the field’ to identify 
possible trafficking situation. 
The Instruction also gives guidance on how to deal with victims, witnesses and their reports 
or statements. Another appendix to the Instruction contains a section on the proper treat-
ment of victims, with a further explanation of the offence of THB, both as regards its mani-
festations and its characteristic features.  

7.3 Research results 

This paragraph shows how many cases are registered with the PPS, how many are dealt with 
by the PPS and how many are settled by the courts, per year. So, no cohort was followed.6 
The research methodology can be found in Appendix 2. As a result of the legislative 
amendment which took effect on 1 January 2005 – replacing Article 250a Dutch Criminal 

                                                                      
5 Albeit improved information will probably also result in more cases. 
6 This means that the figures do not always regard the exactly the same cases, as not all cases are registered, dealt 

with by the PPS and settled by the courts in the same year. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 134 

Code by the wider-ranging Article 273a Dutch Criminal Code7 – it is impossible to report in 
a uniform manner on the period before and after the date of its entry into force. This makes 
it difficult to draw comparisons between the years before and after 1 January 2005. It is 
known, however, that all the cases in 2005, as in previous years, relate to exploitation in the 
sex industry. 

7.3.1 Cases of THB registered with the Public Prosecution Service 

In the period from 2001 to 2005 841 criminal cases were registered with the PPS involving 
(among others or exclusively) a suspicion of THB (Articles 250ter, 250a and/or 273a, Dutch 
Criminal Code).8 A (criminal) case, in the context of prosecution, is the case against a single 
accused. 

Table 7.1 shows how many cases there were each year and (so far as known) how many cases 
(also) involved underage victims.9 

Table 7.1 Number of cases registered10 and cases (also) involving underage victims, per annum 

Year Cases registered Cases (partly) relating to minor-aged victims 

2001 130 27 21% 

2002 200 27 13% 

2003 156 41 26% 

2004 220 32 15% 

2005 135 36 27% 

Total 841 163 19% 

The number of registered cases fluctuates: the low number of cases registered in 2003 was 
followed by a ‘peak year’, with 220 cases registered in 2004, but then a relative low point with 
only 135 cases in 2005. The standard report on THB by the National Public Prosecutor’s Of-
fice [Parket-Generaal (PaG)], dated 30 November 2006, shows that more THB cases were 
registered with the PPS in the period from January up to and including August 2006 than for 
the whole of 2005.11 Nevertheless, it is worthwhile exploring the possible explanations for 
the low number of registrations in 2005, and mainly whether there are factors at play of a 
more structural nature. The PPS has convened a working group to look into possible rea-
sons, consequences and solutions. 
 

                                                                      
7 Renumbered as Art. 273f Dutch Criminal Code in mid 2006. For the sake of clarity, this Chapter refers to Arti-

cles 250ter, 250a and 273a respectively, meaning Articles 250ter (old), 250a (old) and 273a (old) respectively. 
8 Including cases subsequently dismissed by the PPS or where the ultimate charges did not include THB. 
9 Criterion used: registration under Article (sub)sections that indicate explicitly the minority age of the victims. 

Underage victims may also, however, be involved in cases charged under different Article (sub)sections, so that 
the figures here are almost certainly underestimates. 

10 Including cases transferred (to a different court jurisdiction) 
11 137 of them. 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 

 135 

Possible causes of the low number of cases registered with the Public Prosecution Service in 2005 
The possible causes, which partly only apply in certain districts, include (in no particular order): the 
fact that authorities are still getting used to the new THB Article 273a Dutch Criminal Code; a (tempo-
rary) lack of checks in the prostitution sector; prostitution police teams focussing on administrative 
checks (rather than criminal investigations); a lack of police capacity and competition from other of-
fences; a lack of priority; authorities waiting for assistance from the EMM or passing the buck to 
EMM; a primarily reactive approach (acting only when the crime is reported); failure to record indica-
tions; reorganisations; frequently changing duty priorities for public prosecutors; the (temporary) lack 
of a THB public prosecutor; and the prosecution of THB suspects for offences other than THB. 

The number of cases relating (also) to underage victims fell in 2004, in both absolute and 
relative terms, but rose again in 2005. For the entire period from 2001 to 2005 19% of the 
cases relates (also) to underage victims. This tells us nothing about the number of underage 
victims. 

Table 7.2 reflects the results of differentiating the THB cases registered with the PPS accord-
ing to the paragraphs within the THB provision(s) in the Dutch Criminal Code. 

Table 7.2 Type of THB, for each year of registration12 

Type of  2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

THB N % N % N % N % N % N % 

250ter/a (1) 34 26% 52 26% 31 20% 60 27% 22 16% 199 24% 

250ter/a (2) 96 74% 148 74% 125 80% 160 73% 39 29% 568 68% 

273a (1) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 27 20% 27  3% 

273a (3) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 43 32% 43  5% 

273a (4) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 4  3% 4  0% 

Total 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 135 100% 841 100% 

The vast majority of THB cases in the period from 2001 to 2004 relates to Articles 250ter (2) 
or 250a (2), i.e. THB by two or more persons acting in concert, or involving a victim under 
the age of 16, or resulting in serious physical injury. In 2005 – after the new THB provision, 
Article 273a Criminal Code, came into effect on 1 January – many of the cases (nearly one 
third) relate to Article 273a (3), i.e. THB by two or more persons acting in concert, or involv-
ing a victim under the age of 16. There is also a fairly frequent occurrence of cases registered 
under Articles 250ter (1), 250a (1) or (in 2005) 273a (1) in the period from 2001 to 2005. In 
2005 a few (4) cases were registered under Article 273a (4) (THB committed by two or more 
persons acting in concert, and involving a victim under the age of 16). 
Exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry, and certain activities relating to organ 
removal were brought within the scope of ‘THB’ when Article 273a Criminal Code came 
into effect. Unfortunately, the way the Article is worded does not allow for differentiation 
                                                                      
12 Articles 250ter/a (3) and 273a (5) and (6) are not mentioned in the table because they were not in operation 

during the relevant period. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 136 

by the nature of the exploitation according to paragraphs and sub-paragraphs. It is known, 
though, that in 2005 the courts did not deal with any cases concerning exploitation outside 
the sex industry, or organ removal. 

Human trafficking is often committed in combination with other offences, such as arrang-
ing entry into the country for undocumented migrants, (attempted) rape or complicity in 
rape, possession or use of weapons, (attempted) deliberate deprivation of liberty or being an 
accessory to this, or offences connected with drugs, making and using fake or forged travel 
documents, assault and threats.NRM3 Hence, a single case can cover several offences. 

Table 7.3 provides an overview of the most severe offence registered for each (THB) case. 
Cases combining different offences with the same maximum penalty are classified under 
THB.13 

Table 7.3 Most serious offence, per year of registration 

2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total Most severe 
offence N % N % N % N % N % N % 

Sexual violence 18 14% 14 7% 14 9% 26 12% 16 12% 88 10% 

Other violence 3 2% 7 3% 2 1% 13 6% 7 5% 32 4% 

Offence against 
property 

2 1% - - 1 1% - - - - 3 0% 

Vandalism/ 
public order 

- - - - - - 2 1% - - 2 0% 

THB: 250ter/a (1) 24 18% 43 21% 23 15% 43 19% 16 12% 149 18% 

THB: 250ter/a (2) 81 62% 131 65% 109 70% 131 60% 35 26% 487 58% 

THB: 273a (1) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 23 17% 23 3% 

THB: 273a (3) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 32 24% 32 4% 

THB: 273a (4) n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 4 3% 4 0% 

Other offences un-
der Criminal 
Code14 

2 1% 5 2% 7 4% 5 2% 2 1% 21 2% 

Total 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 135 100% 841 100% 

In 2004, THB was the only or the most serious offence registered in 79% of cases, with the 
corresponding figure for 2005 being 82% of the cases. In the other cases there was an even 
more serious crime involved besides THB, usually a form of sexual violence such as indecent 
assault or rape. 

                                                                      
13 If this still produces a combination of offences with the same maximum penalty, then the offence committed 

first takes precedence. 
14 For example (THB in combination with) fraud, bribing an official, bigamy, inducing a minor to drunkenness or 

abducting a minor.NRM3 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 

 137 

Looking at the period from 2001 to 2005 as a whole, THB was the only or the most serious 
offence registered in 83% of the cases. 

There are fewer registrations of THB in combination with ‘participation in a criminal or-
ganisation’ (Article 140 Dutch Criminal Code). Possible explanations include that the THB 
cases mainly relate to suspects operating on their own (such as loverboys) and/or that they 
are principally ‘quick hit’ cases. 

7.3.2 The suspects 

Age 
In more than three quarters of the cases registered in 2004 and in 2005, the suspect’s age at 
the time of the first THB offence15 was between 18 and 41. The average age in 2004 was 32, 
and in 2005 it was 30,16 and in both these years there were four underage suspects (2% and 
3% respectively).17 

Country of origin 
The suspects came from more than 50 different countries. Table 7.4 shows (in alphabetical 
order) the most important countries of origin.18 See Table B7.4 in Appendix 4 for a com-
plete overview. 

Table 7.4 Country of birth of suspects, per year of registration 

Country of birth 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N N N N N N % 

Albania 4 26 5 - - 35 4% 

Bulgaria 12 27 19 14 4 76 9% 

Czech Republic 5 2 - 2 5 14 2% 

(Federal Republic of) Germany 1 - 1 5 1 8 1% 

Hungary 1 1 - - 6 8 1% 

Iraq 1 6 - 2 - 9 1% 

Morocco 5 3 3 9 17 37 4% 

Netherlands 30 51 47 91 53 272 32% 

Netherlands Antilles 1 1 2 7 3 14 2% 

Nigeria 3 7 5 4 - 19 2% 

Poland - 4 - 3 3 10 1% 

Romania 2 8 22 23 6 61 7% 

(former) Soviet Union 6 7 11 8 1 33 4% 

                                                                      
15 One individual can be suspected of several THB offences. 
16 Standard deviation is 11 in both years. See Appendix 3 for a more detailed explanation. 
17 There were 4 in 2001, 3 in 2002 and 7 in 2003. 
18 The criterion for inclusion in this table is that at least five suspects came from the country concerned in one of 

the years, or at least ten over the entire period from 2001 to 2005. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 138 

Suriname 4 5 10 9 6 34 4% 

(former) Yugoslavia 22 6 3 3 4 38 5% 

Turkey 8 26 16 24 15 89 11% 

Other 25 16 9 13 11 74 9% 

Unknown - 4 3 3 - 10 1% 

Total  130 200 156 220 135 841 100% 

The Netherlands was again the most frequently occurring country of birth19 in 2004 and 
2005. Looking at the entire period from 2001 to 2005, the substantial proportion of suspects 
born in Turkey and Bulgaria (both around 10%) is worth mentioning. Proportionately, 
though, the number of suspects from Bulgaria diminished. Countries such as Albania and 
(the former) Yugoslavia seemed to peak incidentally as countries of birth (in 2002 and 2001 
respectively).20 Romania scored high in 2003 and 2004. 

Table 7.5 shows the annual ranking order for the five most prevalent countries of birth for 
suspects.21 

Table 7.5 Ranking of the most prevalent countries of birth of suspects, per year of registration 

Land 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 Rank Rank Rank Rank Rank Rank 

Albania  3’     

Bulgaria 3 2 3 4  3 

Hungary     4’  

Morocco    5’ 2  

Netherlands 1 1 1 1 1 1 

Romania  4 2 3 4’ 4 

(former) Soviet Union 5  5    

Suriname    5’ 4’  

Turkey 4 3’ 4 2 3 2 

(former) Yugoslavia 2     5 

As in previous years, the overview shows a constant first place for the Netherlands as coun-
try of birth and also a reasonably stable position for Turkey in the top five. In the previous 
Report, Bulgaria and Yugoslavia were also mentioned as more or less steady ‘top’ countries, 
but these have become less significant as countries of birth for suspects. By contrast, Mo-
rocco's share has increased substantially. 

                                                                      
19 Ethnic background is not registered. 
20 (The former) Yugoslavia also scored highly at the end of the 1990s: 19% in 1998 and 13% in 1999. 
21 The year 2005 is taken as reference point for determining the order in which the countries are listed. An accent 

indicates a shared position. 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 

 139 

Gender 
Most suspects are male – in 81% of the cases in 2004 and 87% of the cases in 2005. There are, 
however, clear distinctions between countries of origin. If we confine ourselves to the most 
important countries of origin for suspects, as included in Table 7.5, it is noticeable that there 
are scarcely any women among the Turkish or Moroccan suspects (no more than 2% to 3%), 
whereas a substantial proportion of the Russian, the (few) Hungarian, the Romanian and 
the Bulgarian suspects were female (39%, 37%, 34% and 30% respectively). The other coun-
tries of origin occupy a position in between these extremes. For instance, 11% of Dutch sus-
pects are female.22 

7.3.3 Cases dealt with by the Public Prosecution Service  

Table 7.6 shows, for each year of registration, the number of THB cases in which the suspect 
was taken into pre-trial detention. 

Table 7.6 Pre-trial detention, per year of registration 

Preventive 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

custody N % N % N % N % N % N % 

Yes 94 72% 154 77% 130 83% 161 73% 102 76% 641 76% 

No 36 28% 46 23% 26 17% 59 27% 33 24% 200 24% 

Total 130 100% 200 100% 156 100% 220 100% 135 100% 841 100% 

In 2004 and 2005, about three quarters of the suspects were in pre-trial detention at the 
moment the case was brought before the court. This percentage rate is fairly stable over the 
years. 

Table 7.7 shows how the PPS processes cases. While the above tables refer to the 841 crimi-
nal cases registered in the period from 2001 to 2005. Table 7.7 concerns the 896 cases the 
PPS dealt with in the same period.23 

Table 7.7 Cases dealt with by the PPS, per year in which the cases were dealt with 

Dealt with 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

THB summons24 99 62% 111 68% 117 66% 177 70% 107 73% 611 68% 

Unconditional deci-
sion not to prosecute

46 29% 40 25% 42 24% 63 25% 28 19% 219 24% 

                                                                      
22 This also applies to suspects from Albania; 15% of the suspects from Suriname are female. 
23 The difference between the number of cases registered and the number disposed of by the Public Prosecutions 

Service results from the fact that the Public Prosecutions Service does not always take a decision on 
prosecution in the same year when the case is registered. 

24 It concerns a summons for THB, either solely or in addition to other offences. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 140 

Summons for others 
offences25 

12 8% 10 6% 11 6% 6 2% 2 1% 41 5% 

Transfer26 1 1% - - 2 1% 2 0% 1 1% 6 1% 

Joinder (of cases) - - 1 1% 4 2% 1 0% 2 1% 8 1% 

Conditional decision 
not to prosecute 

1 1% - - - - 2 0% 4 3% 7 1% 

Out-of-court  
settlement 

- - 1 1% - - 1 0% 2 1% 4 0% 

Total 159 100% 163 100% 176 100% 252 100% 146 100% 896 100% 

The number of cases dealt with shows a similar pattern to the number of cases registered 
with the PPS: 2004 was a peak year, with 252 cases, but was followed by a relative low point 
with only 164 cases processed in 2005.27 
The summons was by far the most common disposal in both these years (72% and 73% of 
the cases respectively). The summons are usually (also) for THB (more than 70% of all out-
comes in both years), but sometimes only for other offences. A quarter of the cases was un-
conditionally dismissed in 2004, and 19% of the cases in 2005. The other forms of dealing 
with THB cases (joinder of cases, transfers, conditional dismissal and out-of-court settle-
ment) were only used sporadically. 

Unconditional dismissals happened more often for cases of non-aggravated THB than for 
those cases where there was an element of aggravation. A relatively high proportion of the 
THB cases registered under the new Article 273a ended with a summons (frequently for 
THB). This was the case for 84% of the cases registered under Article 273a (1), and virtually 
all of those registered under the (more serious) paragraphs 3 and 4. 

7.3.4 Settlement by the court 

To recapitulate: in the period from 2001 to 2005, 841 cases were registered with the PPS in 
which there was (also) a suspicion of THB. During the same period, 896 cases were dealt 
with by the PPS. Also in the same period, the courts (of the first instance) settled a total of 
563 cases in which THB was (also) charged.28 Table 7.8 provides a summary, for each year of 
settlement, of the judgments by the courts. 

                                                                      
25 It concerns cases in which, despite earlier suspicions of THB, ultimately no charge of THB was made. 
26 To another district or abroad. 
27 The number of cases dealt with by the PPS will be higher again for 2006 than for 2005. Up until August, the 

figure stood at 146 (National Public Prosecutor’s Office Standard Report on THB of 30 November 2006). 
28 These are not the exact same cases as those registered with, or dealt with by the PPS in this period. The follow-

ing information does not include the cases registered with the PPS as (also) involving THB, but in which the 
summons was issues only for other offences. 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 

 141 

Table 7.8 Settlement in the first instance, per year of settlement 

Settlement 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 
 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

Sentenced 74 87% 84 87% 105 91% 135 89% 98 85% 496 88% 

Acquittal 7 8% 10 10% 5 4% 11 7% 13  11% 46 8% 

Discharge from  
prosecution 

- - - - - - 1 1% - - 1 0% 

PPS inadmissible 3 4% 1 1% 1 1% - - - - 5 1% 

Summons invalid - - - - - - - -  1 1% 1 0% 

Joinder of cases 1 1% 1 1% 5 4% 4 3%  3  3% 14 3% 

Total 85 100% 96 100% 116 100% 151 100% 115 100% 563 100% 

A large majority of the cases brought to the courts in 2004 (89%) and 2005 (85%) ended with 
a guilty verdict. The accused was acquitted in 7% and 11% of the cases respectively. The other 
forms of settlement were used occasionally. 

Table 7.9 provides an overview of the nature of the disposal at first instance, according to the 
most serious offence charged. 

Table 7.9 Settlement for most serious crime, per year of settlement 

Most serious crime Judgment 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

THB:  Sentence 3 (100%) 12 (92%) 10 (91%) 21 (87%) 19 (86%) 65 (89%) 

250ter/a (1) CC Acquittal - 1 1 2 1 5 

 
Discharge from 
prosecution 

- - - 1 - 1 

 Joinder of cases - - - - 2 2 

 Total  3 13 11 24 22 73 

THB:  Sentence 59 (86%) 61 (86%) 81 (89%) 95 (91%) 48 (81%) 344 (87%) 

250ter/a (2) CC Acquittal 6 9 4 6 10 35 

 PPS n.a.* 3 - 1 - - 4 

 Joinder of cases 1 1 5 3 1 11 

 Total 69 71 91 104 59 394 

THB:  Sentence n/a n/a n/a n/a 3 3 

273a (1) CC Acquittal n/a n/a n/a n/a 1 1 

 Total  n/a n/a n/a n/a 4 4 

THB:  Sentence n/a n/a n/a n/a 5 5 

273a (3) CC Acquittal n/a n/a n/a n/a 1 1 

 Total  n/a n/a n/a n/a 6 6 

Sexual violence Sentence 9 8 9 8 16 50 

 Acquittal - - - 2 - 2 

 PPS n.a. - 1 - - - 1 

 Joinder of cases - - - 1 - 1 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 142 

Most serious crime Judgment 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 Total 9 9 9 11 16 54 

Other violence Sentence  1 1 2 3 6 13 

 Acquittal - - - 1 - 1 

 Total  1 1 2 4 6 14 

Offences against - Sentence - - 1 - - 1 

property Total  - - 1 - - 1 

Vandalism/ Sentence 1 - - 2 - 3 

public order Total 1 - - 2 - 3 

Other offences under 
the Criminal Code  

Sentence 1 2 2 6 1 12 

 Acquittal 1 - - - - 1 

 Summons invalid - - - - 1 1 

 Total 2 2 2 6 2 14 

Total Sentence 74 (87%) 84 (87%) 105 (91%) 135 (89%) 98 (85%) 496 (88%) 

 Acquittal 7 10 5 11 13 46 

 
Discharge from  
prosecution 

- - - 1 - 1 

 PPS n.a 3 1 1 - - 5 

 Summons invalid - - - - 1 1 

 Joinder of cases 1 1 5 4 3 14 

 Total  85 96 116 151 115 563 

* PPS inadmissible 

The detailed subdivision means that some cells are so empty that percentage rates are fairly 
meaningless. Hence, these are only included in the fuller cells. Points worth noting: 
– in 2004, the rate for guilty verdicts in cases where THB was the most serious charge was 

close to 90%, and this also applies to all cases together (see the bottom part of the table); 
– in 2005, the rate of guilty verdicts was a little lower: 82% for charges under Article 

250ter/a (paragraphs 1 and 2 together) and 80% for charges under the new Article 273a. 

Sentences imposed 

Until recently, PPS data only contained information on the nature of judicial decisions in re-
lation to the summons and not in relation to the offences for which an accused is ultimately 
convicted. This has changed. From 2003 onwards, it is possible to disregard the cases where 
THB was charged but did not lead to a conviction for THB. However, in order to enable a 
comparison with previous years, the present Report includes an overview (Table 7.10) of the 
kinds of sentences imposed in all cases where the summons included THB charges,29 by the 
most serious offence resulting in a conviction. 

                                                                      
29 So this includes the cases in which the court did not convict the accused for THB. 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 

 143 

Table 7.10 Sentence imposed for most serious crime, per year of settlement 

Most serious crime Sentence imposed30 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

THB: No principal sentence31 - 1 - - - 1 

250ter/a (1) CC 
Conditional principal sen-
tence 

- 1 1 - 2 4 

 Custodial sentence 5 11 8 15 15 54 

 CSO* - 1 3 3 2 9 

 Fine - - 2 - - 2 

 Custodial sentence + CSO - - 1 - - 1 

 Total  5 14 15 18 19 71 

THB: No principal sentence - 1 1 - - 2 

250ter/a (2) CC 
Conditional principal sen-
tence 

- 2 2 3 - 7 

 Conditional sentence 43 (78%) 41 (79%) 46 (77%) 72 (80%) 36 (82%) 238 (79%) 

 Conditional sentence + fine - - 2 2 3 7 

 CSO  9 4 4 4 2 23 

 CSO + fine 2 3 - 1 - 6 

 Fine - - 2 2 1 5 

 Custodial sentence + CSO 1 1 3 6 2 13 

 Total 55 52 60 90 44 301 

THB: Conditional sentence 1 - - - - 1 

250ter (3) CC Total  1 - - - - 1 

THB: Conditional sentence n/a n/a n/a n/a 2 2 

273a (1) CC Total  n/a n/a n/a n/a 2 2 

THB: Conditional sentence n/a n/a n/a n/a 5 5 

273a (3) CC Total  n/a n/a n/a n/a 5 5 

Sexual violence Conditional sentence 7 4 7 7 12 37 

 Custodial sentence + CSO - - 1 - - 1 

 Total 7 4 8 7 12 38 

Other violence No principal sentence - - - - 1 1 

 Conditional sentence 3 2 1 6 7 19 

 CSO - - - 1 1 2 

 Fine 1 - - - - 1 

 Total  4 2 1 7 9 23 

Offences against - Conditional sentence - 4 4 1 - 9 

property Total  - 4 4 1 - 9 

                                                                      
30 It concerns unconditional sentences, unless indicated otherwise. 
31 In cases in this category an additional sentence (e.g. confiscation) or a measure (e.g. detention under a hospital 

order) may have been imposed. The term ‘additional sentence’ is somewhat misleading, because the court may 
also impose only such a sentence. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 144 

Most serious crime Sentence imposed30 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

Conditional principal sen-
tence 

- 1 - - - 1 Vandalism/  
public order 

Conditional sentence 1 - 4 7 - 12 

 CSO  - - 1 - - 1 

 Fine - - - 1 - 1 

 
Conditional sentence + 
CSO 

- - 3 - - 3 

 Total 1 1 8 8 - 18 

Other offences under  Conditional sentence 1 5 2 3 2 13 

the Criminal Code Total 1 5 2 3 2 13 

Other and unknown No principal sentence - - 2 - - 2 

 Conditional sentence - 1 3 1 5 10 

 Fine  - - 2 - - 2 

 Conditional sentence + fine - 1 - - - 1 

 Total - 2 7 1 5 15 

Total  No principal sentence - 2 3 - 1 6 

 
Conditional principal sen-
tence 

 4 3 3 2 12 

 Conditional sentence 61 (82%) 68 (81%) 75 (71%) 112 (83%) 84 (86%) 400 (81%) 

 Conditional sentence + fine  1 2 2 3 8 

 CSO  9 5 8 8 5 35 

 CSO + fine 2 3 - 1 - 6 

 Fine 1 - 6 3 1 11 

 
Conditional sentence + 
CSO 

1 1 8 6 2 18 

 Total  74 84 105 135 98 496 

* Community Service Order 

This table also includes only few percentage rates, because of the large number of (almost) 
empty cells. The following points are worth noting: 
– in 2004, a sentence of imprisonment was passed in 88% of all cases in which THB was 

charged (whether or not in combination with other offences) and where the court im-
posed a penalty. This was sometimes combined with a monetary fine or community ser-
vice. The figure for 2005 was 91%. 

– in the period from 2000 to 2003, this annual percentage rate was in the range between 
81% and 86%. 

– in 2004, in 88% of all cases where 250ter/a (2) was the most serious offence and a penalty 
was imposed, this was imprisonment. The figure for 2005 was 93%.32 This percentage 
also has grown in recent years (in 2003 it was 83%). 

                                                                      
32 Either imprisonment only or imprisonment plus a community service order or a monetary fine. 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 

 145 

Conviction for THB 
A total of 288 accuseds were found guilty of THB in the period from 2003 to 2005.33 Uncon-
ditional prison sentences were imposed in 252 of these 288 THB cases, of which 20 were 
combined with (unconditional) monetary fines or community service order. The average 
prison sentence was roughly 25 months (758 days, standard deviation 848). The highest av-
erage prison sentence was imposed in cases where violence was the most serious offence: 
2086 days, or more than five and a half years, in cases of sexual violence (standard deviation 
1487)34 and 2485 days, or more than six and a half years, in cases of other violence (standard 
deviation 2293).35 

7.3.5 Appeal? 

The PPS data is limited to the settlement of cases by courts of the first instance. In addition 
to this, it is known whether an appeal has been lodged in such a case, and by whom. Table 
7.11 provides an overview. 

Table 7.11 Appeal lodged, per year of settlement (at the first instance) 

Appeal Lodged 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

None  44 52% 48 50% 69 59% 92 61% 58 50% 311 55% 

By PPS 4 5% 10 10% 6 5% 6 4% 13 11% 39 7% 

By the accused 22 26% 23 24% 28 24% 44 29% 25 22% 142 25% 

By both parties 15 18% 15 16% 13 11% 9 6% 19 17% 71 13% 

Total  85 100% 96 100% 116 100% 151 100% 115 100% 563 100% 

The Table shows that an appeal was lodged in 39% of the cases in 2004 and 50% of the cases 
in 2005, most often (only or also) by the accused. The percentage varies slightly over the 
years. 

7.4 International developments 

7.4.1 International collaboration 

The National Action Plan against THB indicated that the Cabinet would promote interna-
tional collaboration where possible. The PPS was asked to indicate where it was encounter-
ing hindrances in practice. A working group from the THB prosecutors’ consultation group 
has concluded that international cooperation is not always easy, albeit not impossible. It 

                                                                      
33 This means that in this period 50 cases resulted in a conviction for one or more offences other than THB: 
 105+135+98 = 338 (see the totals for 2003 to 2005 included in Table 7.10) minus 288. 
34 19 cases in total. 
35 Five cases in total. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 146 

does require extra input, and is therefore time-consuming. The pressure from the imposi-
tion of performance standards is diametrically opposed to this, and needs to be dealt with. A 
solution can usually be found for most (practical) hindrances. Europol and Eurojust can play 
their part by indicating any incompatibilities in definitions and legislation, while Dutch for-
eign liaison officers can be particularly useful in setting up contacts and acquiring informa-
tion. Any unfamiliarity among public prosecutors with international collaboration can be 
obviated by training and education in this area. 

7.4.2 Eurojust36 

The number of cases being referred to Eurojust from various countries has been climbing 
steadily for some years, increasing by 54% to 588 in 2005. The nature of Eurojust’s mandate 
implies that these cases involve at least two (European) countries. Eurojust plays an active 
part in investigation and prosecution in these cases, in collaboration with the relevant na-
tional agencies. 33 cases37 involving THB and people smuggling38 were referred to Eurojust 
in 2005. 
Nine of the total of 73 coordination meetings organised by Eurojust in 2005 related to THB. 
The aim of these meetings is to facilitate collaboration and coordinate action in specific 
cases. Eurojust also organises strategic meetings on important investigations into and 
prosecutions of serious organised crime. One of the topics in 2005 was THB. The aim of 
these strategic meetings is threefold: 1. to disseminate information on practical prosecution 
problems and on solutions and best practices in the area of THB, and to set up a forum 
where legal officials can discuss the subject with their colleagues from other countries; 2. to 
create networks of public prosecutors and detectives working in the field of THB, and to 
generate confidence in order to secure improved, faster and more direct collaboration and 
coordination within the European countries; and 3. to identify possible new cases for col-
laboration and coordination and to draw them to the attention of Eurojust. The Eurojust 
2005 Annual Report contains an extensive report on the most important findings from the 
strategic meeting on THB (and people smuggling). 

7.5 Points of attention and bottlenecks 

Points of attention and bottlenecks in relation to the prosecution of THB. 

(Increased) attention to the fight against THB 
– Greater attention is being paid to the fight against THB at the policy level within the Pub-

lic Prosecution Service. It is important that this should now be translated into the practice 

                                                                      
36 Information based on data from the Annual Report, 2005 (Eurojust, 2006). 
37 There were 19 in 2004. The 2005 Annual Report describes two THB cases. 
38 The text of the 2005 Annual Report only mentions THB cases; the tables containing numerical information 

appear to show that these include both THB and people smuggling cases. No further subdivision is made. 



THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION SERVICE AND PROSECUTION 

 147 

of investigation and prosecution. There are still variations in the degree of priority given to 
THB in the various districts. 

– Performance indicators may well assist in placing the fight against THB on the agenda, but 
they can operate as a hindrance to important but time-consuming activities such as (for in-
stance) international collaboration and confiscation. They can also result in (too much) in-
vestment being made in ‘quick hit’ cases, and not enough in investigation and prosecution 
of all suspects in a given case. The reduction in the number of combined registrations of 
‘THB’ and ‘membership of a criminal organisation’ might be an indicator of this.  

– Despite consultation between the PPS and the IND, the bottlenecks in the collaboration 
between these two chain partners have not yet been resolved. 

– The plans to improve the Public Prosecution Service’s information position via the pro-
grammatic approach are not designed to increase the numbers of investigations and 
prosecutions for THB, but may well lead to this, and then (extra) capacity would be 
needed to cope. 

Prosecution and trial 
– In 2005, the number of cases of THB registered with and processed by the PPS and dis-

posed of by the courts was low. (Provisional) figures for 2006 indicate that this was not the 
start of a downward trend: the numbers of THB cases were on the increase again in 2006. 

– It is unfortunate that the shared perspective of the public prosecutors holding the THB 
portfolio (one from each district), are not always being applied by the case prosecutors in 
practice. 

– The sentences imposed for THB are low. The question arises as to whether the courts are 
always sufficiently conscious of the nature and gravity of the offence of THB. 

– Human trafficking is not a specialist area for the judiciary. 

Points of attention in relation to (academic) research 
– The wording of the THB Article is such that it is impossible to discern the type of exploita-

tion involved (in the sex industry, in other sectors of the economy or in relation to organ 
removal) from registration under different paragraphs and sub-paragraphs. This is a prob-
lem from the perspective of research. 

– From the researcher’s point of view, it is inconvenient that the information from Eurojust 
does not differentiate between THB and people smuggling. 

 





 149 

8 
 Exploitation in Sectors other than 

the Sex Industry 

8.1 Introduction 

According to the Palermo Protocol and the EU Framework Decision, exploitation, which is 
a characteristic of THB,1 can take the form of forced labour or services, slavery or practices 
similar to slavery. These elements have been incorporated into Article 273f Dutch Criminal 
Code. The description of the offence of THB now covers exploitation in every economic 
sector as well as the coerced removal of organs. 
When the new clause on THB was introduced, neither researchers nor the investigative ser-
vices had a good notion of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry in the Nether-
lands. The exploratory literature search by Van der Leun and Vervoorn (2004) had indicated 
that an increased risk was present, with respect to these forms of exploitation. BNRM ac-
cordingly carried out an exploratory study aimed at collecting case studies of serious abuses 
in employment situations. Exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry does occur in 
the Netherlands, but it is impossible to determine the scale of the problem. 

This chapter presents the results of the BNRM study into exploitation in sectors other than 
the sex industry. It deals with the term ‘exploitation’, the collected cases (and their categori-
sation), the relevant economic sectors, the groups at risk, and finally with points of attention 
and bottlenecks in the fight against this type of exploitation.  

8.2 BNRM study into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 

The preliminary BNRM study into exploitation2 outside the sex industry covered the period 
from 2000 to 2005 and was not confined to specific economic sectors, regions or groups in 
society. The methodology applied was qualitative, making use of case descriptions in par-
ticular. This methodological approach stemmed in part from the absence of empirical re-
search into this type of exploitation in the Netherlands or operational information from po-
lice investigations. Appendix 2 contains an explanation of the research methods used. 

8.2.1 Definition of terms 

Many people think of exploitation as a situation where someone makes someone else work 
in unfavourable conditions in order to earn as much money as possible. The definition of 

                                                                      
1 The description of the offence does not require that someone should actually have been exploited. 
2 The research did not encompass every element of the definition of THB as an offence. This is explained in §8.4. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 150 

‘exploitation’ as stipulated in the Criminal Code does not, however, coincide with the mean-
ing of the term in common parlance. The legal expression only covers extremely unfavour-
able conditions. Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code deals with excesses where human rights 
are at stake. This is apparent from the Explanatory Memorandum,3 which indicates that ex-
ploitation as defined in the clause on THB relates to modern forms of slavery. The Minister 
of Justice, when submitting to the Lower House the Additional Measures for the National 
Human Trafficking Action Plan [Aanvullende maatregelen bij het Nationaal Actieplan Mensen-
handel], emphasised that THB relates to excessively degrading circumstances in employ-
ment or service relationships involving fundamental breaches of human rights.4 This may 
include forcing someone to work or abusing someone’s dependent position if, in the given 
circumstances, that person reasonably has no other choice than to end up being exploited. 
The Explanatory Memorandum cites the example of an extremely long working week for 
disproportionately low wages in poor working conditions. The fact that the Article on THB 
is not intended to criminalise less serious abuses can also be inferred from the fact that it is 
included in the title ‘Crimes against Personal Freedom’ in the Dutch Criminal Code. 

8.2.2 The reasons for the BNRM study 

Information from surrounding countries 
It is a known fact that in other western European countries serious abuses in employment 
situations take place. In Belgium, for example, for some years a quarter of the registered vic-
tims of THB have been exploited in other sectors than the sex industry (Centre for Equal 
Opportunities and Opposition to Racism, 1999; 2000; 2002), and a French Parliamentary 
investigating commission found exploitation in textile sweatshops, the catering industry and 
elsewhere (Lazerges, 2001). Exploitation outside the sex industry also occurs in the United 
Kingdom and Germany (e.g. Anderson, 2005; Cyrus, 2005). It is likely, therefore, that this 
type of exploitation is also going on in the Netherlands. At the same time, relevant distinc-
tions that may be able to be drawn between the Netherlands and the surrounding countries. 
The fact that the Netherlands has a relatively small informal economy and domestic sector, 
for instance, could reduce the risk of labour exploitation. But the precise influence of these 
factors is unknown. 

Conclusions from an earlier literature study 
The exploratory literature study on slavery-like exploitation in the Netherlands by Van der 
Leun and Vervoorn appeared shortly before (the former) Article 273a Dutch Criminal 
Code5 came into effect. The authors conclude that there appears to be large-scale and in-
creasing illegal employment in the Netherlands, and that illegal workers find it very difficult 
to insist on proper working conditions. It also appears that their working conditions and po-

                                                                      
3 Parliamentary Papers II 2003/4 29,291, no. 3. 
4 Parliamentary Papers II 2005/6 28 638, no. 19, p.1. 
5 With effect from 1 September 2006, the THB provision was renumbered as Art. 273f Dutch Criminal Code.  



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 151

sition in the employment market have deteriorated in recent years, and that the increasingly 
underground nature of illegal employment is leading to situations that might readily turn 
into slavery-like practices (Van der Leun & Vervoorn, 2004). The authors also point out the 
increased risk of excesses resulting from the growing numbers of fraudulent labour subcon-
tractors and undocumented migrants working in private households. 

Discussion of the new Article on THB 
With the introduction of the new Article on THB it has not become entirely clear when a 
situation of reprehensible working conditions is deemed to cross the line into exploitation as 
defined in Article 273f, paragraph 2, Dutch Criminal Code. The legislature has left it partly 
up to the courts to define the exact scope of the new provision. Until more case law than the 
current very few judgments is available, this will hamper investigation and prosecution of 
exploitation outside the sex industry.6 The input of case descriptions should facilitate the 
discussion on the scope of the Article, while knowledge of the various forms in which ex-
ploitation manifests itself is important for the fight against THB. 

8.2.3 Response 
Table 8.1 shows the categories of organisations and individuals who received a questionnaire 
about (possible) exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry, as well as the response 
rates. 35 key figures were approached directly. This allowed BNRM to record 119 case stud-
ies.7 The number of individuals concerned is higher, as some of the cases involve several 
people working in (very) poor circumstances and/or several profiteers. Not all of the 119 
cases collected are cases of exploitation as defined in Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code, 
however. The respondents also described situations which were not so serious as to amount 
to exploitation in the sense of THB. Categorisation on the basis of Article 273f Dutch 
Criminal Code follows at §8.4.3. 

Table 8.1 Response rate per category to BNRM questionnaires 

Category Approached Replies Response rate Interviews Cases 

Social workers/social aid organisations 1373 283 21% 42 50 

Lawyers 919 170 28% 27 33 

Social Council members 48 19 40% 1 2 

Reception centres for asylum seekers and 
illegals 

81 22 27% 4 4 

Labour market fraud teams 14 13 93% n/a. 9 8 

Medical staff at the Johannes  31 0 0% 0 0 

                                                                      
6 The Netherlands is not an exception here. As far as forced labour is concerned, the ILO has established that 

nearly all countries have made this a criminal offence, but that there are almost no detailed definitions of the 
expression. The result is that there are seldom any prosecutions, so that there is little (political) interest in the 
subject (ILO, 2005). 

7 Two cases became known to BNRM from various sources. These are counted once. 
8 The AMF described employment situations too briefly to be able to talk about specific individual cases. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 152 

Category Approached Replies Response rate Interviews Cases 
Wierstichting 

Migrant organisations 111 11 10% 3 2 

Investigators at the Social Information 
and Investigation Service (SIOD) 

220 51 23% 1 9 7 10 

Total 2797 569 20% 78 107 

Table 8.2 Key figures contacted directly 

Category Respondents11 Interviews12 Cases 

Social workers 6 2 5 

Investigators 8 3 1 

Trade unions 4 3 2 

Industry/sector organisations 4 4 0 

Government agencies 10 8 3 

Other 3 3 1 

Total 35 23 12 

8.3 Exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry in the sense of 
THB 

8.3.1 Legal perspective 

During the first year after it entered into force, the new Article on THB raised many ques-
tions among the (special) investigation services, the Public Prosecution Service, lawyers and 
NGOs.13 In particular, the concept ‘exploitation’ requires more clarification. The legislature 
has intended that Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code should deal with situations involving 
excesses, but the wording provides a potentially wider scope. A literal interpretation would 
allow Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code to cover situations with varying degrees of gravity. 
However, not every abuse in an employment or service relationship should be regarded as 
THB. Exploitation outside the sex industry involves an excess, though there is no unambi-
guous description of this available. The issue must be determined on a case-by-case basis, 
with one of the determining factors being violation of fundamental human rights. 
 

                                                                      
9 It had not been intended to interview SIOD investigators, but one investigator contacted BNRM in person. 
10 The SIOD investigators described employment situations too briefly to be able to talk about specific individual 

cases. 
11 We also talked to key figures dealing with exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry in certain foreign 

countries. They are not included in this table. 
12 Only interviews concerning substantive information immediately irrelevant to the research, for example cases 

or risk sectors, are included. 
13 Some of these issues were raised during the congress jointly organised by BNRM entitled ‘Forms of THB 

outside the sex industry’ in March 2005. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 153 

The link with human rights 
From the point of view of legislative history, it makes sense to link the interpretation of Article 273f 
Dutch Criminal Code to the protection of human rights. The list of practices that exploitation at least 
comprises, in paragraph 2, is based on Article 3(a) of the Palermo Protocol and Article 1.1.c of the EU 
Framework Decision. Those provisions in turn derive definitions from Article 4 of the European 
Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR). An interpreta-
tion based on these sources implies that a human rights approach should define the limits of the scope 
of Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code. Labour situations then only amount to exploitation in the sense 
of THB if they involve a violation of fundamental rights such as human dignity, physical integrity and 
personal freedom. 

A situation can be deemed to be excessive if there is one manifest excess, such as having to 
rent a chair in the workplace as sleeping accommodation between shifts, or if there is an ac-
cumulation of less serious matters such as underpayment. In such cases, the excess is to be 
found in the buildup of abuses. The excess must in principle be measured according to the 
standards applicable in Dutch society and the Dutch legal system.14 
The use of certain means of force is not a necessary element of exploitation. At the same 
time, it is hard to imagine someone volunteering to be exploited. The involuntary nature of 
the situation consists of the impossibility of getting out of it.15 Sometimes exploitation is the 
result of a physical restriction on freedom, such as confinement. But the exploiter can also 
keep the victim in his grasp in some other way and then the victim’s perception of the situa-
tion may hinder escape, although possible in practical terms. The question is then whether 
(s)he can reasonably have been under the impression that there is no way to escape from the 
situation, given the complete set of circumstances, as well as how these circumstances inter-
relate.  

8.3.2 Indicators of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry 

How to recognise an exploitative situation? In this study, BNRM used the following list of 
indicators which can help to identify a situation of exploitation. 
 

List of important indicators of a possibly exploitative situation 
Coercion/deception 
- (threats of) physical violence against the employee 
- (threats of) reporting the employee’s illegal residence status 
- putting unacceptable pressure on the employee in some other way 
- putting the employee to work in a different sector or under different conditions to those agreed 
- abusing the employee’s ignorance of his rights 
Bad working conditions 

                                                                      
14 Whether the victim feels exploited is not a determining factor. Consent is irrelevant if certain elements of 

coercion have been used. 
15 People may be recruited and subsequently coerced to continue working in deplorable circumstances (CGKR, 

2005). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 154 

- compulsory dangerous work 
- unreasonable working hours 
- being paid less than the minimum wage or nothing at all 
- having to work even when ill 
Lack of freedom 
- the employer/intermediary confiscates the employee’s (travel) documents 
- the employee is not allowed any, or hardly any, contact with the outside world 
Multiple dependence 
- the employee is bound to the employer/intermediary by debt 
- the employee is dependent on the employer for, for example, accommodation, food or documents 

It is possible to think of other indicators. Not all of the indicators need to be present for a 
suspicion of exploitation, but it is important to be aware of the possible connection between 
different reprehensible circumstances. One should not only take note of a worker’s resi-
dence status, for example, without relating it to sub-standard working hours, remuneration 
and accommodation. 

Barrier model16 
The barrier model, developed by the Social Information and Investigation Service [Sociale 
Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdienst (SIOD)], is useful to see the interconnection between indi-
cators of labour exploitation. This model provides a schematic representation of four barri-
ers to be overcome by immigrants: travel, accommodation, identity documents and finding 
employment. There is a legal path and an illegal path associated with each of the barriers.17 If, 
for any one of the barriers, migrants (have to) rely on the services of illegal ‘facilitators’, such 
as smugglers, rack-renters,18 document forgers or malafide job contractors, they often build 
up a debt. Multiple dependence can arise if someone becomes dependent on the same indi-
vidual in connection with two or more of the barriers. This increases the risk of exploitation. 
Malafide ‘facilitators’ sometimes employ violence against migrants. Neither the barriers in 
this model nor the indicators of THB listed should be understood as falling within any fixed 
chronology. The model is an analytical tool which facilitates the observation and recording 
of multiple dependence. 

Combination of sexual exploitation and other forms of exploitation 
Exploitation in another sector than the sex industry may precede, coincide with or follow on 
sexual exploitation. BNRM collected eight case descriptions with indications of this combi-
nation. 

                                                                      
16 This description of the barrier model is drawn from Van der Lugt and Zoetekouw (2003). 
17 For each barrier, the model specifies illegal facilitators, legal facilitators and the relevant enforcement bodies. 
18 Research commissioned by the Dutch government [De huisvestingsproblematiek bij tijdelijke werknemers uit het 

buitenland] showed temporary migrant workers living or working in more than half of the 139 municipalities 
investigated. Two-thirds of these municipalities experience problems related to the accommodation of the 
migrant workers, such as a shortage of suitable housing, or the availability of inferior housing only. The 
government then developed a leaflet about providing proper accommodations for temporary migrant workers. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 155 

8.3.3 Labour and services 

Human trafficking revolves around exploitation in labour or services, but a broad interpre-
tation of the terms ‘labour’ and ‘services’ is needed in this context. The description of the of-
fence does not confine itself to formal employment relationships. Labour and services also 
include other work that represents a financial value, done in a context where one individual 
exercises control over another. 
 

Some relevant aspects of labour law19 
Labour law has elements of both public and private law. Regarding labour conditions, it principally 
consists of rules on maximum working hours and on health and safety. Administrative and criminal 
sanctions are available for infringement of some of these rules, while the enforcement of others is 
delegated to employees, the parties to collective labour agreements, and works councils. Legislation on 
employment contracts contains rules on the contract between an individual employee and his or her 
employer, including rules on the payment of wages. This area of labour law is governed by Article 
7:610 Dutch Civil Code and by collective labour agreements. Enforcement occurs through proceed-
ings before the civil courts.20 
The Aliens Employment Act [Wet arbeid vreemdelingen (WAV)] prohibits employers to hire certain 
foreign nationals without a permit to do so. This applies to work through an employment contract or 
by virtue of any other structure, undertaken commercially or in the private sphere. If someone is found 
to employ a migrant illegally, it is assumed that this migrant has worked with that employer for six 
months for normal wages and working hours in the relevant sector. This is also the assumption, in case 
the employee submits a claim for back wages. 
Illegal employment does not absolve employers from their obligations in relation to the employees 
concerned. However, it appears that immigrants who have been working illegally and underpaid rarely 
claim back wages. One lawyer in the BNRM research described as ‘unique’ the wage claims she had 
lodged for three Chinese clients held in aliens’ detention – each for more than €15,000 and based on 
the collective agreement in the catering industry and the number of hours worked. Possible explana-
tions why the underpayment of illegal workers does not lead to wages claims more often include igno-
rance among these workers about their rights and how to enforce them, fear of the employer, multiple 
dependence on the employer, untraceability of the employer, inability to demonstrate that they have 
worked for the particular employer, a desire to stay ‘below the radar’ of official bodies, and the fear that 
proceedings before the civil courts might have consequences for their residence in the Netherlands. 

Normal employment situation, still exploitation 
Several cases have been noted in which someone forces someone else to work some place 
under normal conditions, and then to hand over his or her wage entirely. In this situation, 
there is no employment relationship between the exploiter and the victim. This often goes 
hand-in-hand with the money being squandered by the person who has extorted it. Do these 
cases, without actual abuses at the workplace, constitute exploitation in the sense of Article 

                                                                      
19 The following section is based on Bakels et al. (2003). 
20 Reference is made to Chapter 2 for the Bill Amending the Minimum Wage and Minimum Holiday Allowance 

Act in connection with the introduction of administrative enforcement [Wet op het minimumloon].  



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 156 

273f Dutch Criminal Code? Exploitation is not confined to serious abuses in an employment 
situation. It can also take the form of coercion to work. It is not necessary for the exploiter to 
be exercising control over the victim at the workplace or as an employer. 

Criminal conduct 
BNRM has collected a number of cases concerning coerced criminal acts, such as pickpock-
eting and forgery, which can be regarded as a form of labour or services. The same applies to 
the coerced conclusion of loans for someone else. Forcing someone else to commit a crime 
may in certain circumstances amount to THB, but it can also be dealt with under criminal 
law as incitement. 
 

Incitement approximating exploitation 
In October 2004, the Court of Appeal in Arnhem convicted an accused for inciting minors to commit 
theft. According to the Court, he had played a prominent and leading part in a criminal organisation 
formed of members of his immediate family and extended Roma family. Within this organisation, the 
suspect and his wife on many occasions sent out young children on burglary jobs, including their own 
children. A telephone conversation between the accused's wife and their son illustrates this; he was 
reprimanded by his mother because of the fact that he was not a good burglar. The verdict contains lit-
tle information on how the accused sent the children out to burgle. It is stated, though, that they were 
often young children, some of whom were under the parental authority of the people inciting them, 
which suggests that they had no reasonable alternative but to commit the break-ins. An argument 
could therefore be made that such practices constitute forced or compulsory labour or services. 

Other conduct in relation to THB 
A possible area for debate is whether having to tolerate something can amount to exploita-
tion in the sense of THB. The question is a relevant one, as appears from media reports in 
2006 and the ensuing political debate on the smuggling of Somali children for temporary 
residence in the Netherlands with a view to enrichment through child benefit. Can the fol-
lowing situation be classified as exploitation: adults bring a child to the Netherlands illegally 
and under false pretences in order to receive child benefit payments and spend less than that 
amount on actual care of the child, after which, when this is no longer possible, the child is 
taken back to Somalia and abandoned there? Or does this only amount to THB if it also in-
volves abuses in relation to work? In the Additional Measures to the National Action Plan 
on THB [Aanvullende maatregelen bij het NAM], the Minister of Justice states that these kinds 
of practice generally fall beyond the reach of the section on THB, but may be criminal of-
fences under other provisions.  
Hence, certain conduct may almost amount to – or form an element of – exploitation, while 
at the same time constituting a different offence, such as illegal adoption, rack renting and 
forced marriages. Illegal adoption only falls within the definition of THB if there is an inten-
tion to exploit the adopted child, according to the Minister of Justice in the Additional 
Measures. Rack renting is a form of residential letting where the landlord knowingly and 
willingly accepts a dangerous condition or use of the accommodation, for the highest possi-



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 157

ble return. If this involves the rental of accommodation to undocumented migrants, it 
amounts to smuggling (Article 197a, paragraph 2, Dutch Criminal Code). Rack renting 
therefore is not exploitation in the sense of THB per se, but may well be an indication, be-
cause it can be coupled with a forced labour situation. Schmidt and Rijken (2005) argue that 
arranging a forced marriage falls, in principle, within the THB provision if the person ar-
ranging the marriage receives money or other assets in return. 

8.4 Case descriptions 

A total of 119 case descriptions of abuse in labour situations were collected. They vary widely 
in terms of gravity. All cases were considered on the basis of the criterion discussed in the 
following section in order to determine which should be categorised as exploitation. The 
aim was to formulate a criterion that could be used in (legal) practice. §8.4.3 contains the 
categorisation of case descriptions into situations which can indeed be deemed exploitation, 
and abusive situations which do not amount to exploitation. 

8.4.1 Preliminary remarks 

Three preliminary comments should be made in relation to the presentation of the case ma-
terial. First of all, these are second-hand reports obtained in interviews with respondents. Of 
course, it is not possible to attach the same value to this material as it would be to facts found 
by a court. 
The second remark relates to the benchmark for categorising the cases. The question is 
whether they fall within the provisions of Article 273f (2) Dutch Criminal Code. Exploita-
tion per se is not criminalized as THB, but rather (intended) exploitation in one of the con-
texts described in sub-paragraphs 1, 2, 4 and 6 of paragraph 1 of the Article.21 This means that 
if the situation qualifies as exploitation here, this does not automatically constitute conduct 
that can be prosecuted under Article 273f Criminal Code.  
Finally, the broadened THB clause entered into force on 1 January 2005. However, in order 
to research whether exploitation occurs independent of any criminalisation, BNRM asked 
the respondents about the period from 2000 onwards. 

8.4.2 Qualifying criterion for the cases 

In order to formulate a sharply defined criterion on the basis of which a distinction can be 
drawn between abuses amounting to exploitation within the meaning of Article 273f (2) Crimi-
nal Code, and other abuses, we must refer to that type of exploitation in the non-
comprehensive enumeration paragraph 2, with the determinative elements constituting the 
lowest threshold. After all, these elements have to be found, in any event, for a situation to 

                                                                      
21 Please refer to §8.3.1 and Chapter 2 for an analysis of the Article on THB. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 158 

be covered by Article 273f (2) Criminal Code.22 It goes without saying that more serious 
forms of abuse then also amount to exploitation. The form of exploitation with the ‘lowest’ 
requirements mentioned in paragraph 2 is forced or compulsory labour or services (see box 
below). An actual or alleged lack of freedom on the part of the victim is also a fixed element 
of exploitative situations. 
The criterion for exploitation applied by BNRM is accordingly based on the combination of 
a lack of freedom, as a constant factor, and at least one of the following practices, which indi-
cate forced or compulsory labour or services: 
– force, including (threats of) physical or sexual violence or the reporting of illegal residence 

or employment; misuse of authority arising from the actual circumstances; or abuse of a 
vulnerable position; 

– bad working conditions, including unreasonable working hours, underpayment, and dan-
gerous work without the requisite protection; 

– multiple dependence, including working to pay off debts and being dependent on the 
same individual for employment and, for example, accommodation and identity papers. 

A situation therefore amounts to exploitation if these one of these problems exists and the 
victim is not free to leave the situation, or reasonably thinks that he or she is not free to do so. 
In practice, the constant factors and variable factors may overlap. The lack of freedom, for 
example, may be intertwined with excessive working conditions or the abuse of a vulnerable 
position may be so severe that the victim has no real choice but to suffer exploitation. When 
assessing a situation, all the particulars of the case, such as the duration, the degree of organi-
sation and the age of the victim, must be taken into consideration. 
 

Explanation of the criterion 
In order to compare the determinative elements of the different forms of exploitation, enumerated in 
Article 273f, paragraph 2, Dutch Criminal Code, BNRM reverted to internationally accepted defini-
tions. Articles 3(a) of the Palermo Protocol and 1.1.c of the European Framework Decision derive con-
cepts from Article 2 of the Convention on Forced Labour of the International Labour Organisation 
(ILO), Article 4 ECHR and Article 1 of the United Nations Slavery Convention, in conjunction with 
Article 1 of the UN Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery. Based on the existing in-
ternational definitions, forced or compulsory labour or services is the ‘least serious’ form of exploita-
tion mentioned in Article 273f (2) Criminal Code. 
In terms of Article 2 of the ILO Convention on Forced Labour, forced or compulsory labour is all 
work exacted from a person under the menace of any penalty and for which that person has not of-
fered himself voluntarily. Apart from this practice, Article 4 ECHR also prohibits slavery and servi-
tude. In its judgment dated 26 July 2005 in the case Siliadin vs. France, the European Court of Human 
Rights set out the order of the practices prohibited in Article 4 ECHR. The Court followed the defini-
tion in Article 2 of the ILO Convention as regards the interpretation of forced labour and deemed the 
menace of a penalty to exist when employers deliberately stimulate the fear of being picked up by the 

                                                                      
22 This threshold need not, however, be a final one. Since the enumeration is non-comprehensive, it is impossible 

to rule out a potentially wider interpretation of the concept of exploitation in case law. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 159 

police of an unaccompanied and undocumented minor working for them. Thus, there does not need to 
be (the menace of) a penalty in the literal sense. 
Servitude involves an even greater deprivation of personal freedom. Though it does not involve a claim 
to rights attached to ownership, it is in line with slavery in terms of gravity. According to the judgment 
of the ECHR mentioned above, it is the situation where someone is obliged to provide services, living 
in the house of his ‘keeper’ without the possibility of changing his status. It would make sense if the 
same applies to the servitude-like practices in Article 273f, paragraph 2, Dutch Criminal Code. 
It follows that cases must be regarded as exploitation as defined in Article 273f, paragraph 2, if they in-
corporate at least the elements of forced or compulsory labour or services. These elements – the men-
ace of any penalty and being available for the work involuntarily – can be translated into concrete indi-
cations. Anderson and Rogaly (2005) have done this for research on forced labour in the United King-
dom. They mention four indications: violence (or the threat of violence); other forms of force such as 
debt bondage or the confiscation of identity papers; excessive dependence on an employer or third 
party; and other abuses such as extremely long working hours and degrading accommodation. Ac-
cording to the authors, none of these indications amounts to forced labour in itself, but someone is 
deemed to be a victim of forced labour if he suffers from at least one of the indications and reasonably 
thinks that he is not free to walk away from the situation. 

8.4.3 Categorisation of the cases 

When applying this criterion, exploitation as defined in Article 273f Criminal Code, was 
found in 45% of the 119 collected case descriptions. Again, though, it should be noted that 
this criterion cannot be equated with punishable THB. Nor does Table 8.3 reflect the scale of 
the phenomenon. 24 of the case studies could not be classified as either exploitation (in the 
Netherlands in the period from 2000 to 2006) or not. 

Table 8.3 Classification of cases 

Classification Cases 

Exploitation 54  

No exploitation 41  

Other 24  

 prior to 2000  3 

 outside the Netherlands  2 

 borderline cases  2 

 inadequate information  17 

Total 119  



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 160 

The fact that the research produced only two cases that were found to be ‘borderline cases’ 
should not conceal the fact that there was intensive debate about a far higher number of 
cases.23 The following section presents the most important points of this debate. 

Obvious exploitation 
But first two cases which present obvious instances of exploitation. The first example relates 
to domestic work. The victim was not paid, she had limited freedom of movement, was in-
timidated and maltreated. She was also in a vulnerable position and had to work for her in-
laws, on whom she depended for both her accommodation and her residence permit. The 
fact that she suffered the abuse for months on end does not indicate free will, but rather that 
she had no reasonable alternative. 
 

The case of the Indian daughter-in-law (exploitation) 
When she was 22, K was subject to an arranged marriage to a Dutch national of Indian origins. The 
marriage was arranged by the parents and, in exchange for their consent, K’s parents received a piece 
of land. There were, however, false pretences, because when K arrived in the Netherlands it turned out 
that her husband was mentally retarded. It was not a true marriage. The husband and wife, who lived 
with his parents, slept apart and K was treated as household help. She was confined to the house and 
could not go out alone or take Dutch lessons. She was socially isolated and not allowed to contact her 
family or friends in India. Her jewellery, clothing and passport were taken away from her by her father-
in-law. K was threatened and abused by various members of the family. Her father-in-law tried to 
abuse her sexually. He succeeded in doing so after eight months, at which point K fled from the house. 
She was taken to a shelter by a passer-by, where she related her experiences as a sort of ‘mail order 
bride’ and domestic worker for her in-laws. She reported to the police, divorced and tried in vain, 
through a lawyer, to recover her belongings her former in-laws. Her attempt to secure an independent 
residence permit was unsuccessful, but she did not want to return to India from fear of being ostra-
cised. Her parents wanted nothing more to do with her after the breakdown of her ‘marriage’. K trav-
elled illegally to some relatives in the United Kingdom. 

The second example of exploitation concerns Ukrainian temporary workers who were 
smuggled into the Netherlands. As a result of the practices of a malafide job contractor/rack 
rent landlord associated with the employment agency, they ended up indebted and working 
without pay. 
 

The case of the Ukrainian agency workers (exploitation) 
About 20 Ukrainians, mostly men, travelled to the Netherlands via an employment agency. For the 
trip, they had bought fake/forged passports from the employment agency for €1,500. Some paid the 
agency one time the monthly salary that is promised to them, between €1,200 and €1,600. The people 
were instructed to contact a particular Ukrainian in the Netherlands, who would get them jobs so that 
they could settle the outstanding debts to the employment agency. This middleman put them to work 

                                                                      
23 The discussion was mostly internal to BNRM. Some cases were discussed anonymously in an expert meeting 

organised by BNRM, on the definition and scope of the concept of ‘exploitation’ in relation to THB, in 
December 2005. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 161 

illegally in Dutch horticulture and construction companies. The businesses hiring the workers con-
cluded all of the arrangements on working conditions with the malafide job contractor. The migrants 
worked 12 hours a day without being paid. Their debts continued to accumulate because they had to 
pay the contractor between €180 and €350 per person per month for group accommodation in small 
houses. The job contractor misused the debt situation, threatening those who protested against the la-
bour conditions with the prospect that they would be given no work at all, while their debt would con-
tinue to increase. Several Ukrainians who escaped from this situation tried to report the situation to 
the police. The police did not, however, see sufficient clues for an investigation. 

Cases that are obviously not exploitation 
Cases where no labour or services is provided cannot constitute exploitation in the sense of 
THB. The following case description is an example of this, though abuse of another person’s 
vulnerable position is clear here. 
 

Robbing partner (no exploitation) 
A Dutch woman, S, (aged 36) lived in a supervised home because of psychiatric problems and lack of 
anywhere else to stay. S, who appeared to maintain casual sexual contacts with several young men 
from the Antilles, embarked on a relationship with ‘B’. S indicated, though, that she was afraid of him 
and there were signs that he had raped her. One day, B violently forced S to hand over her cash card 
and code, and withdrew all the money from her account, amounting to a few hundred euros. He also 
stole her bicycle. After the incident, S broke up the relationship and reported the theft to the police. 
The police suspected that B to be a member of a criminal gang and started an investigation. 

Labour situations in which abuse occurs that is not serious enough to be described as slav-
ery-like practices also fall outside the scope of Article 273f Criminal Code. For example: 
 

Double shifts in a factory (no exploitation) 
T had financial problems when he was offered the prospect of a permanent contract with the factory 
he worked in. In exchange for the promise of a fixed contract, T had to do extra shifts in the holiday pe-
riod. T often worked two successive shifts and was not given the obligatory days of rest. After this 
heavy period had passed, the promise turned out to be false. T was dismissed. He protested but did not 
challenge the dismissal formally. As a result of his unemployment, his family became homeless. 

Borderline cases 
Various questions arise, when considering concrete case studies of non-sexual exploitation, 
particularly with cases where there are several substandard circumstances, none of which on 
its own amounts to gross abuse. 
One question in relation to a borderline case is whether it can be considered exploitation 
and, if so, on what conditions, if someone collaborates in a fraud benefiting another person 
without the co-perpetrator being aware of this or profiting from it. 
 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 162 

The case of benefit payment fraud (borderline case) 
In 1993, A from Iraq obtained refugee status. In the asylum proceedings he had stated that he had a wife 
and child. A travelled back to Iraq, where he entered into an arranged marriage with ‘H’, who was 15, 
and brought her to the Netherlands. Because of her age, he arranged false identity papers for H. They 
also brought H’s five year old nephew, pretending he was their son. H and her nephew obtained a resi-
dence permit based on their false papers. Her mother followed some years later, pretending to be A’s 
mother, something H was unaware of. A alleged that H’s mother owed him €20,000 for this. 
H and A had two children of their own. H started off taking Dutch lessons, but she had few social con-
tacts. A abused her physically and sexually and also abused the children, particularly the nephew. A 
was generally out of work and he neglected his wife and the children. H almost never had any money 
and she was unaware that her husband had for years been obtaining family benefit payments, child 
benefit and a benefit payment for her mother. It was not clear what he spent this money on. A always 
kept his wife’s original and fake documents in his possession. In 2002, H fled with her children to an 
emergency centre for battered women, where she learned about such basic things as using an ATM. H 
reported A to the police and applied for a divorce. H and her mother also applied for social security 
benefits under the false names they were still using. 
In 2004, A got into trouble because he was working while receiving benefits. He then reported the ille-
gal immigration of H and her mother, who had by this time obtained Dutch nationality under their 
false identities. The State reclaimed €40,000 of social security from them. The use of false identities 
also had negative consequences H’s Dutch citizenship. And the police could not or would not associate 
the report of abuse H had made under her false name with the subsequent reports under her real name. 
H is now working illegally in the catering industry. She and her nephew are receiving psychiatric 
treatment. The other children have been referred to child welfare. A lives close to H and continues to 
threaten her. 

In this complex scenario, H did not, at least initially as a minor, consciously use the fake 
documents. The fact that she continued to use the false identity in the Netherlands is related 
to her fear of – and multiple dependence on – her violent husband. Does this make her a vic-
tim of exploitation in the sense of THB? Are services being provided if someone unwittingly 
collaborates in another person’s fraud? Does the qualification change if it becomes clearer 
that the fraud is committed under coercion, as in the following case? 
 

Case of participation in child smuggling (exploitation) 
L, a woman from Pakistan, was married in Pakistan to ‘K’, of Pakistani origin but living in the Nether-
lands. When L came to the Netherlands, she also took with her - in addition to her own son from a pre-
vious marriage -, against her will, her brother’s six year old son. With false papers, he arrived in the 
Netherlands ostensibly as L’s son. K had arranged this with L’s brother. L did not agree because she 
thought it would be better for the child to stay with his parents. She was, however, put under extreme 
pressure to cooperate and sign the papers. All of this had to remain a secret in the Netherlands. L’s 
husband seriously mistreated her and her (real) son. There are indications that the child benefit for 
both young boys was sent to L’s brother in Pakistan. In any event, K did not spend it on the children. 
After some time, L fled from home because of the violence. She only took her own son with her. She 
ended up in a reception centre via the teacher of her integration course. L reported to the police and di-
vorced K, but she said nothing about her nephew who was still living with K. Social workers only 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 163 

found out about him, when transferring the child benefit into L’s name. L said that she had kept quiet 
from fear of getting into problems because of her share in the fraud. Out of concern about the boy, a 
report was made to the Child Abuse Advisory and Reporting Centre. 

Points for discussion 
It is argued at §8.4.2 that victims’ lack of freedom to leave an exploitative situation can be in-
ferred from very poor working conditions. This is all the more so if these conditions are 
linked with abuse of a vulnerable situation due to illegal residence. At the same time, it is 
possible that someone consistently works excessive hours for €2 per hour but cannot be de-
scribed as a victim of exploitation. 
 

Case of Iranian asylum seeker (no exploitation) 
D has been in the Netherlands with his wife and children since 1999. The family is awaiting follow-up 
asylum proceedings. They can no longer stay at an asylum seekers’ centre and receive assistance. They 
have found accommodation via a foundation, which pays for gas and electricity and water. D does not, 
however, want to take an allowance from the foundation. He provides for this himself by working ille-
gally in a Turkish coffee house. He rides 50 km on his moped to get to work. He does not get travel ex-
penses and earns €100 a week, working five days a week for ten hours a day. He daren’t ask for a raise, 
as the coffee house is not very successful. Despite the under-payment, D has a good relationship with 
his boss. D understands his own situation and wants at least to do something to provide for his family. 

In this case, the employment conditions are poor, but there is a reasonable alternative for the 
employee in the shape of an allowance from the foundation supporting him. 

In the discussion of actual cases the requirement of a (perceived) lack of freedom to get out 
was put into perspective for those situations where one person deliberately puts another 
person to work in dangerous conditions. 
 

Case of endangerment (exploitation) 
V, an undocumented migrant in the Netherlands, worked for an agricultural business, using a packag-
ing machine under great time pressure. One day his hand was caught in the machine. V lost two fingers 
as a result of the accident. He was summarily dismissed without any help or compensation from the 
employer. V became partially disabled. A NGO telephoned the Health and Safety Inspectorate on his 
behalf to ask whether any action could be taken against the employer. V did not, however, make a full 
report, fearing negative consequences for himself and the undocumented migrants among his former 
colleagues. The HSI did not therefore know which business was involved and could not take any tar-
geted action.24 

The NGOs OKIA and Stek described the HSI response to this case. Three regional HSI of-
fices were asked what would happen if the man fully reported the accident. All three offices 
answered that there was a chance of the Aliens Police being notified of his illegal residence 

                                                                      
24 This case was described by an employee at HSI and an employee from the NGO in question. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 164 

(Benseddik & Bijl, 2004). According to the NGOs, this case – which dates back to before Ar-
ticle 273f Criminal Code, entered into force – illustrates the incompatibility of the two func-
tions of the HSI, of both enforcing proper working conditions and combating illegal em-
ployment. 

It is not necessary for the exploiter to be exercising control over the victim at the workplace 
or in an employer/employee relationship. Several such cases were collected, and this is one 
of them. 
 

Case of the son in a family business (exploitation) 
K was a solitary youth of Turkish Kurd origins. His father was a violent man. When he was 17, K and 
his stepmother reported the abuse to the police. K’s father was convicted and sent to prison. The man 
had a contracting firm, whose only permanent employee was K’s uncle, who derived his residence 
permit from this employment. While his father was serving the prison sentence, K had to keep the 
business going. This meant he could no longer attend school. When business turned bad, his father 
threatened him from prison and ordered him out of the family home. K wanted to go and stay with his 
uncle who but his father would not allow this. K ended up in a crisis reception centre. A child protec-
tion order was issued, since K’s father was in prison and his stepmother had no parental authority over 
him. K appeared to have skipped school more often, although he had not wanted to, because he had to 
work for his father or interpret for his stepmother. 

Here, because of his father’s misuse of authority and (threats of) violence, the youngster had 
no choice but to work, without pay, at the expense of his education and in breach of legisla-
tion on working hours for 17-year-olds. 

8.5 Risk sectors 

8.5.1 Introduction 

In which sectors of the Dutch economy does exploitation occur? The literature often associ-
ates migrant work (illegal or otherwise) with ‘3-D’ jobs; dirty, dangerous and degrading. In the 
Netherlands, as well, the work done by immigrants who are not entitled to work here is for 
the most part poorly valued and poorly paid. Illegal employment is a substantial element of 
the underbelly of the Dutch economy (Van der Leun & Vervoorn, 2004). Employers find it 
difficult to get other workers for unpleasant and low-paid jobs. The risk sectors for labour 
exploitation overlap with the 3-D jobs. Abuse is often identified in labour-intensive produc-
tion processes, where poorly paid workers perform simple tasks. There is a demand for the 
cheapest and most flexible labour, certainly where profit margins are tight, staffing costs 
form an important part of the production costs and the work requires no expertise. This in-
creases the risk that workers are put to work in bad conditions, whether or not arranged by 
malafide labour subcontractors. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 165 

The ILO (2005) points to three trends which partly explain extremely poor working condi-
tions in industrialised nations: the supply of labour migrants, the ever-increasing competi-
tion among producers, and the deregulation of the employment market. Cyrus (2005) also 
points to the links between exploitation and the internationalisation of the labour market, 
international competition among businesses and the unequal distribution of wealth between 
different countries. In this context, labour exploitation can be considered as the ‘dark side’ of 
globalisation (Cyrus, 2005). Employers seem to impose substandard conditions more easily 
on foreign workers (Anderson, 2005).  
In the West, the informal economy25 is part of the survival strategy for those who have no 
access to the formal labour market.26 While the informal economy and illegal employment 
are two different things, they often coincide. The extent of illegal employment in the Nether-
lands is apparent from research carried out in 2005 by the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Employment (SZW) on the level of compliance with the Aliens Employment Act. An 
anonymous survey of employers indicated that 19% of the respondents had employed one 
or more migrants in the previous twelve months, in breach of the Act (Mosselman, 2005). It 
was estimated that 40% of the foreigners working illegally came from the new EU member 
states in Central and Eastern Europe. The percentage of employers in the three most rele-
vant sectors who indicated that they had illegally employed workers in the past twelve 
months was 20% in the agriculture sector, 23% in the catering industry, and 28% in construc-
tion (Mosselman, 2005). The risk of illegality is particularly high in employment agencies; 
42% of the employers stated that they did not always check the documents of workers they 
hired through an employment agency. It would be interesting to know whether this is a con-
nection with the deregulation of this sector.27 
Because of its clandestine nature, the informal economy remains invisible to some extent. 
Corrupt facilitators profit from this. According to HSI inspectors, malafide labour subcon-
tracting often takes the form of short-lived and invisible businesses. Other respondents also 
mention, in relation to wrongs, employment brokers who are not registered with the 
Chamber of Commerce and/or who regularly disappear, through bankruptcy or otherwise, 
in order to minimise their chances of being caught or to escape from their financial obliga-
tions, such as paying employees. In such a circuit, it is difficult for workers to defend them-
selves against abuse, certainly if they are, for instance, undocumented or socially isolated. It 
is clear from the collated cases concerning domestic work and ethnic entrepreneurship that 
exploitation often occurs in concealed situations. The link between ethnic entrepreneurship 
and the risk of exploitation is not a simple one, though. It can be just as much a safety net as a 
stranglehold for immigrants with few prospects in the labour market. 

                                                                      
25 The informal economy has been defined as ‘productive or work activities hidden from or ignored by the state 

for tax, social security and/or labour law purposes but which are legal in all other respects’ or as ‘activities aimed 
at producing a positive effect on income, for which the terms of legislation and regulations applicable are not 
met’ (CGKR, 2005, p.75). 

26 The informal economy’s contribution to the gross domestic product in the European Union is estimated at 
between 7% and 16% (notice from the Commission dated 4 June 2004). 

27 The licensing system for employment agencies was abolished in 1998. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 166 

Finally, the risk of exploitation outside the sex industry appears to be greater in some geo-
graphical areas than in others. Thus there is an increased risk in the major cities and sur-
rounding agricultural areas, because of the relatively large populations of undocumented 
migrants in those cities. In the border areas, exploitative employers can increase employees’ 
dependence and ignorance of their rights by housing them in one country and putting them 
to work in the other. Cross-border exploitation is also harder to observe and detect. 

8.5.2 Relevant sectors 
The case studies collected by BNRM confirm this general picture. They are drawn from 16 
sectors, but as Table 8.4 shows respondents knew of most cases from the catering industry 
(29), domestic work (19), employment agency work (15) and agriculture/horticulture (14), all 
sectors in which illegal employment is known to be quite common. Catering includes a 
range of facilities, but the main subcategory is that of Chinese restaurants. The cases of 
abuse associated with domestic work often occur in a family context. 

Table 8.4 Number of cases with indications of exploitation, per sector28 

Sector Number of cases with indications of exploitation 

Catering 29 

of which Chinese restaurants 11 

Domestic work, including looking after children 19 

of which cases within the family 9 

Employment agency work 15 

Agriculture and horticulture 14 

Food industry 11 

Factory work 8 

Crime, including fraud 7 

Construction industry 6 

Transport and logistics 5 

Markets and shops 5 

Cleaning 5 

Other 10 

If restricted to the cases that qualify as exploitation, the distribution across sectors looks 
slightly different. 

                                                                      
28 The total in the table exceeds the total number of case descriptions collected (119), because one case may involve 

several sectors. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 167 

Table 8.5 Number of cases regarding situations involving exploitation, per sector29 

Sector Number of cases with situations of exploitation 

Catering 8 

of which Chinese restaurants 3 

Domestic work, including looking after children 11 

of which cases within the family 6 

Employment agency work 10 

Agriculture and horticulture 11 

Food industry 5 

Factory work 4 

Crime, including fraud 4 

Construction industry 3 

Transport and logistics 3 

Markets and shops 2 

Cleaning 2 

Other 2 

8.5.3 Discussion of the sectors in question 

Domestic work 
There is no strong tradition of paid domestic work in the Netherlands, by contrast with 
some other European countries. This is now changing rapidly. The growing number of 
double-income households and the increasing average age of the population mean that the 
demand for affordable childcare and other personal services is on the increase. The literature 
contains indications that illegal employment in private household is also on increasing, with 
a concomitant risk of abuse (Van der Leun & Vervoorn, 2004). The examples BNRM found 
illustrate this risk. 
Domestic work is rather invisible and hard to check. It can lead to social isolation and multi-
ple dependence issues, particularly for live-in migrant domestic workers. There is also no 
collective labour agreement or, usually, organisation in a trade union.30 These factors make it 
difficult for domestic workers to defend themselves against abuse. While illegal residence 
and employment contribute to these situations, migrants who are allowed to work also fall 
victim to exploitation in this sector.  
 
                                                                      
29 The total in the table exceeds the total number of cases qualified as exploitation (54), because one case may 

involve several sectors. 
30 In June 2006, mediation by a number of migrant organisations, such as the Commission for Filipino Migrant 

Workers, resulted in the first group of (illegal) Filipino ‘migrant domestic workers' becoming members of the 
ABVA KABO. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 168

The case of the Moroccan girl (exploitation) 
When she was 10, Z’s destitute mother sent her to a Moroccan family living in the Netherlands. Some 
of the children in this family were older than Z and they lived in a small house. Z had to do ‘everything’ 
in the house, as a 24-hour servant. She received no wages and did not attend school. The girl was not 
allowed to go out and her only contact was with visitors to the house. She was intimidated and beaten. 
After a few years of this, Z ran away, and with the help of a passer-by and the police ended up in an 
emergency shelter. Z, who had no relatives in the Netherlands, had fallen seriously behind in her de-
velopment. She was given a residence permit and was placed first in an assisted ‘group’ living facility 
and then in a home for people who are slightly mentally challenged. It is not known whether a report 
was filed against the family for whom L worked for years. 

This girl had to be on call the whole day, was not allowed to go to school or to play outside, 
she was physically abused and received only board and lodgings in return for her work. On 
all of these points the case corresponds with the Siliadin case, in which the European Court 
of Human Rights established servitude.31 
Three special types of employer were found among the cases descriptions in relation to do-
mestic work: the victim's relatives, ‘au pair’ host families and foreign diplomats. 

Domestic work for relatives 
Most recorded cases of slavery-like situations of domestic work occur within family rela-
tionships. Some spouses, daughters, daughters-in-law and step-daughters are reduced to 
unpaid maids. These women are often legal immigrants, whose residence permit (initially) 
depends on their relationship with a partner or relative(s). In some of these cases, the ques-
tion arises as to the significance of the element of work in relation to the total situation of 
abuse and lack of freedom. But also, when does a normal, albeit traditional, allocation of du-
ties turn into disguised employment and exploitation? In the following case studies, the vic-
tims were put to work as household drudge in the homes of their violent in-laws. 
 

Case of Turkish marriage immigrant 1 (exploitation) 
A grew up in a traditional environment in Turkey. She only attended elementary school. When in her 
early twenties, she met a Dutch man of Turkish origin. He told her he had a good income and his own 
house in the Netherlands and that she would have prospects for further development there. They mar-
ried. A came to the Netherlands and obtained a residence permit to stay with her husband. It turned 
out that her husband did not have a house, so they lived with his parents, where A was beaten and hu-
miliated by her husband and her in-laws, including her sister-in-law and mother-in-law. A was just or-
dered around and forced to do a lot of household work. When she did not have to work, A was con-
fined to her room. A’s husband was often away, without her knowing where he was. A ended up being 
socially isolated. Eventually she fled and ended up in a women’s shelter, by way of the police. She re-
ported the abuse and arranged for a divorce. A had to receive treatment for psychological problems 
connected with the abuse. She heard from her grandfather that her former in-laws were slandering 
her. The women’s shelter worried about possible reprisals by her in-laws or her own family. After a 

                                                                      
31 In Siliadin vs. France, see §8.4.2 and Chapter 2. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 169 

few moths, A left for an unknown destination. She possibly had fallen in love. She was reported to the 
police as a missing person. 

 

Case of Turkish marriage immigrant 2 (exploitation) 
D, a poorly educated Turkish woman, was not yet 20 when she came (legally) to the Netherlands to live 
with her Dutch husband, whose family came from the same village in Turkey as hers. It was an ar-
ranged marriage. D and her husband lived in his parents’ home, where she was obliged to do all of the 
household work. She was physically abused by the husband and humiliated by him and his parents. D 
was not allowed to go out alone. Because she had to stay in the house, she was virtually unable to make 
any contacts outside the family, or learn about the Dutch language and society. D was also unable to 
talk freely with friends or family from Turkey. D returned to Turkey on one occasion after her migra-
tion. She tried to stay there but her parents sent her back with her husband. In the end, D came to a 
women’s shelter. She needed a lot of assistance. After years of being treated in this way, her self-esteem 
was very low. D applied for a divorce and an independent residence permit. She also reported the 
situation to the police, which led to a police investigation. 

Bearing in mind the violence that women in these situations have had to endure, it is no sur-
prise that social workers concentrate on other issues than possible exploitation. 

Domestic work as an ‘au pair’ 
The principal aim of residence as an au pair ought to be to learn about Dutch society and cul-
ture. For this purpose, an au pair receives a one-year residence permit, linked to a particular 
host family.32 The au pair lives with that family and does undertakes light household work 
on the basis of equality with the members of the family and in exchange for board and an al-
lowance. There are conditions attached to this work, so that the au pair and the host family 
are not in an employer/employee relationship. If the agreement between the au pair and the 
family is primarily oriented towards working, they are in breach of the au pair regulations 
and the rights and obligations attached to an employment situation, such as paying the 
minimum wage, then apply. 
There are fairly regular reports in the media about abuse of the au pair system, giving the 
impression that many 'au pairs', whether or not they have the appropriate residence permit, 
are actually working as underpaid maids or child minders. In Belgium, which has a similar au 
pair system and similar concerns raised in the media, it has been asked what the use of this 
system is. There are, after all, other options for cultural exchange, which do not put people 
into the precarious position of having to do (certain) work whilst not enjoying the legal 
status of an employee (Bucquoye, 2003). 
In the Netherlands, the Ministry of Justice commissioned an evaluation of the use of the au 
pair rules. This study showed that some of the au pairs worked harder or for longer than was 

                                                                      
32 The au pair can move from one family to another provided that she and the new family meet the requirements. 

The residence permit will still last for only one year. The au pair would therefore only be available to the new 
family for less than one year (Kohlmann, 2003). In the United Kingdom, an au pair visa is issued for two years 
(Anderson et al., 2006) 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 170 

permitted and that 40% of them had complaints about their stay. These related mostly to the 
amount of work and how they were treated. The evaluation disclosed hardly any indications 
of serious abuse (Miedema et al., 2003). 
As a result of this evaluation, a temporary complaints desk for au pairs was set up at the Im-
migration and Naturalisation Service [Immigratie- en Naturalisatiedienst (IND)]. This desk, 
about which au pairs and host families were informed during the application for the resi-
dence permit, received just six reports between June 2004 and December 2005. The number 
of au pair residence permits issued per annum is 761 on average since 2000. Of these six 
complaints, most were submitted via au pair agencies and related to more work than was 
permitted. There were no signs of violence in any of the cases. If there is abuse on the part of 
the host family, the permit is revoked. If the abuse leads to a fine, for example under the 
Aliens Employment Act, or a (conclusive) conviction by the court, the host family is ex-
cluded from the au pair scheme for five years. 
BNRM has not found any cases of exploitation of au pairs who were in the Netherlands for 
less than a year, and living with the appointed host family. This does not mean that it is not 
necessary to remain alert to exploitation of au pairs who fail to meet the conditions of their 
residence permits. Neither the evaluation nor the IND complaints desk provides informa-
tion about the situation of au pairs who have been in the Netherlands for more than a year 
or who have changed host families without amending their residence permit. Nor is it likely 
that an au pair without the proper documents, or without the prospect of another host fam-
ily, would call the IND with a complaint. Other organisations do, however, have an insight 
into the employment situations of undocumented ‘au pairs’. The following case study came 
from an NGO which supports (undocumented) au pairs and other migrants. 
 

Case of the ‘au par’ (exploitation) 
V, a Philippino girl, came to the Netherlands as an au pair. At her first host family, despite other agree-
ments on paper, V not only had to look after the children but also had to do increasing housework, and 
work on Saturdays. Without her knowing it, V became undocumented, because the host family had 
not registered her. A row broke out and V went to another family where she encountered the same 
problems: there was no residence permit and V was given too much work to do. V went to a third host 
family. Her duties there included cleaning the house and the swimming pool, walking the dog, cooking 
for the 15 and 18 year old sons and being on hand in the evenings and at weekends to serve guests. V 
was in fact a maid and she earned between €450 and €500 per month. She did not have her own pass-
port and was afraid of the lady of the house, who treated her badly. After more than 5 years of illegal 
residence, V went to an NGO which tried to mediate. Her boss said she would sort out V’s registration 
and insurance, but some months later the situation had not changed. Then V’s host family offered her a 
loan of €1,000 to build a house in the Philippines. The NGO warned that this would increase her de-
pendence, but V still took the loan. V’s working conditions continued to be poor and she was not al-
lowed to rest when sick, for example. When it became too much for her, she left. Because the situation 
was beyond mediation, the NGO collected V’s things from the family. V gave back the money she had 
borrowed and got her passport in exchange. The NGO wants to ask a lawyer whether she could claim 
back wages. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 171 

BNRM did not find any exploitation of au pairs with valid residence permits – au pairs who 
have been in the Netherlands for less than a year and are living with the host family for 
whom the permit was issued. Nonetheless. the au pair status involves particular risks. Cer-
tainly, if au pairs stay in the Netherlands for more than a year, or change host families with-
out reporting the fact, then can find themselves in an extremely vulnerable position. 

Domestic work for foreign diplomats 
The third group of migrant domestic workers at an increased risk are those working for for-
eign diplomats. They are vulnerable not only because of multiple dependence and being 
rather invisible, but also because of their employers’ (legal) status – diplomatic immunity can 
extend to conduct of a diplomat acting as a private individual – and the fact that Dutch law 
does not automatically apply to their employment situation. 
Migrant domestics working for diplomats have a special position under both the law relat-
ing to immigration law and labour law. Certain diplomats can bring (a limited number of) 
foreign employees to the Netherlands under a privileged document issued by the Ministry 
of Foreign Affairs [Ministerie van Buitenlandse Zaken (BuZa)]. There are some 240 individu-
als with such a document in the Netherlands. BuZa checks the underlying employment con-
tract before it issues the document. These checks have become more rigorous in recent 
years. Diplomats are now informed of the Dutch minimum wage and are supposed to agree 
at least that level of wages. The checks do have limitations, though. Diplomats and their em-
ployees are free, for example, to have the contract governed by law other than Dutch law. 
Literature (e.g. Connor, 2001) shows that these circumstances can result in exploitation 
within diplomatic households. BNRM was informed about one case of exploitation in this 
context in the Netherlands. 
 

Case of the domestic worker of a diplomat (exploitation) 
A 23 year old Ethiopian, P, came to the Netherlands on a privileged document to work as a house-
keeper and child minder to an Egyptian diplomat. The employer paid for her trip and fetched P at 
Schiphol airport. P immediately handed her passport to him and never got it back. P had to work virtu-
ally non-stop for the diplomat’s family. She looked after the children and did domestic work such as 
washing, cooking and cleaning. P had no days off and had to be available for her employers on a 24 
hour basis. She lived with the family but did not have her own room. She slept in the childrens’ room. 
She got little to eat and little sleep. She was not allowed to go out alone and was locked up in the house 
when her employers were away. Nor was P allowed to attend her own church, as her employers tried 
to convert her. The lady of the house hit P, sometimes with a shoe or a toy. She also punched her and 
pulled her hair. P was allowed to telephone her mother once every two months. The contract set out a 
monthly salary of $150. The parties allegedly agreed that $100 of that would be sent to P’s family in 
Ethiopia. In fact, however, P worked for board and lodging. She only received a small amount for 
clothing on two occasions. 
P managed to escape after about three years. The diplomat reported to BuZa that P had gone missing 
and her residence entitlement lapsed. P applied for asylum. During these proceedings nothing was 
done with P’s statements concerning the (criminal) acts of her employer. The application was rejected 
but P stayed on in the Netherlands. She got in touch with a lawyer via the STV, and reported the abuse 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 172 

and unlawful deprivation of liberty by her former employers to the police. P, who was illiterate, could 
not give a full name or complete address in her report. Little was done with the report, because of the 
lack of information and the diplomatic status of the employers. These factors also made it difficult to 
lodge a claim for wages. Eventually her lawyer was given the employer’s full name by the government, 
but by then he was no longer posted in the Netherlands. 

Even if the employer had paid the agreed $150, the wage would have been below Dutch 
minimum wages. The contract was also in breach of the minimum standards under Dutch 
labour law on other points. According to BuZa, today no document would not be issued in 
such a case – the above case dates from 2000 or 2001. 
BuZa has little information of the actual living and working conditions of the domestic 
workers with a privileged document and it almost never receives complaints by them. This 
might mean that there are few cases of abuse, or that employees are unaware that they can 
go to BuZa with complaints. The latter option is not inconceivable, as these migrant work-
ers may lead an isolated existence, may not have had their rights explained to them and 
never have to go to the Ministry. The Dutch government could adopt a more proactive pol-
icy as regards this specific group of migrants and their employers – as happens in Belgium, 
for instance. 
 

Belgian policy in relation to migrant domestic workers with foreign diplomats 
The ministries of Foreign Affairs and of Employment in Belgium have embarked on an information 
campaign aimed at domestic workers, their employers and front-line services about the rights of mi-
grant domestic workers. The campaign, partly focussing on diplomatic staff, was initiated by NGOs 
and is supported by trade unions and employer organisations. Moreover, the Belgian Ministry of For-
eign Affairs maintains contact with migrant domestics working for foreign diplomats. Prior to issuing 
the visa, it meets with the domestic worker at the Belgian embassy to discuss the labour contract. Once 
the domestic worker arrives in Belgium, she must collect an ID card in person at the Ministry. At this 
point, she again talks to an official. The employee needs to renew the ID card each year at the Ministry. 
This is an opportunity to ask questions or mention any problems. The domestic workers know that 
they can also contact the Ministry at other times and they do. If they complaint of exploitation, the 
Ministry refers them to organisations offering assistance. In the year 2004, this happened on six occa-
sions. 

Agriculture and horticulture33 
Two NGOs, OKIA and Stek, published in 2004 a study on illegal employment in the green-
house sector in a region known as the Westland. The authors found that employment condi-
tions for undocumented workers here are deteriorating as a result of increases of scale, in-
creasing computerization, growing international competition and the change from a supply-
driven market into a market led by demand in which growers were dependent on the wishes 
of ever larger and stronger consumers (Benseddik & Bijl, 2004). In this context, the farmers 
try to keep down wage costs and increase productivity. This means that the personnel capac-

                                                                      
33 This also includes auctions of flowers and vegetables. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 173 

ity has to coincide with changing commercial pressures, while there was a shortage of avail-
able, legal workers for peak periods. The authors report that it became obvious in 1998, 
when new legislation on employment agencies [Wet allocatie arbeidskrachten door interme-
diairs (WAADI)] came into effect, that this seasonal work is an important market for em-
ployment brokers. Their obligation to be licensed was abolished by WAADI, and within a 
few months the number of employment agencies operating in the Westland grew from a few 
dozen to about 1,600, including many small-scale intermediaries of Turkish descent. Illegal 
employment in the Westland now largely involves temporary employment agency workers 
(Benseddik & Bijl, 2004). 
The research by OKIA and Stek also shows that the conditions are worse for illegal em-
ployment agency workers than for the diminishing numbers of illegal workers employed di-
rectly by the growers. Abuses include underpayment, irregular or non payment, no bonuses 
for overtime or night work, being forced to work while ill or pregnant, not being allowed to 
talk while working and being shouted at. There were also reports of employers provoking 
fights, which they would then use an excuse to fire permanent employees (Benseddik & Bijl, 
2004). 
The picture given by OKIA and STEK is supported by the responses from the AMF teams 
to BNRM. Ten of the fourteen teams had received indications of exploitation in the horticul-
tural business. For seven teams this was also the case in other forms of agriculture.34 Inspec-
tors mainly see underpayment, long working hours and poor accommodation. In one large 
farming business which had repeatedly violated the Aliens Employment Act, for example, 
six illegal Polish and Bulgarian employees shared one small room, there was one shower for 
at least twenty men and there were no emergency exits.35 Another farmer had 16 people 
sleeping in a tiny and cold storage room. A strawberry grower had Slovakian employees 
sleeping on pallets next to rotten fruit. One grower who paid three weeks’ wages for four 
weeks’ work told the HSI that this was standard practice. 
The respondents also refer to the competition between agricultural employment agencies 
and the part played by malafide contracting firms. Some gangmasters of Turkish origins al-
legedly put Turkish-speaking Bulgarians to work illegally for growers without agreeing any 
(hourly) rate for them. There is an impression that payment is generally below minimum 
wage levels. The following case study concerns a boy illegally employed, working long hours 
and being underpaid. 
 

Case of the Somali boy (exploitation) 
R, a 17-year old Somali, had been in the Netherlands illegally for two and a half years. R spoke a little 
Dutch and rented a room from distant relations. R worked in a farming business from 6 am to 6 pm, 
six days a week. The agreed hourly rate was €5 and R got his meals at work. Three other Africans also 

                                                                      
34 The results of enquiries with the AMF teams and SIOD investigators might also have been determined by the 

selection of the sectors prioritised by the HSI and the SIOD. 
35 The HSI also sees dangerous sleeping arrangements for undocumented migrant workers in other sectors, for 

example in the vicinity of chemicals and without escape routes. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 174 

worked there. R got on with his employer, but he was paid less than had been agreed. When R asked 
the farmer about this, there was always some excuse. He would sometimes give R €20 or €50. 

As in other sectors, checks on compliance with the Aliens Employment Act have intensified 
in agriculture and horticulture in recent years.36 The fine for employing someone illegally 
was increased with effect from 1 January 2005.37 It is difficult to assess whether these meas-
ures are resulting in fewer abuses in employment situations. Now that labour exploitation is 
punishable as THB, inspectors and (special) investigators will have to be alert on the shop 
floor for any signs of excess. 
Various factors make it difficult to pick up on these signs. First of all, every (special) investi-
gation service has a specific function and appropriate powers. The workplace checks by the 
AMF teams, for instance, are aimed at checking compliance by employers with the Aliens 
Employment Act. Inspectors do not generally ask questions about working hours, wages or 
accommodation. Usually the inspectors only find out about the particulars of an employ-
ment situation if they establish an infringement of the Aliens Employment Act. It is also 
possible that the employer, the intermediary and the worker all have an interest (or think 
they do) in making sure that a situation is not discovered. 

Employment agency work 
The growing demand for flexible and inexpensive labour, and the risks associated with this, 
are particularly visible in the temporary employment. It has been estimated that employ-
ment agencies provide work for between 60,000 and 100,000 undocumented migrants, and 
some of the malafide employment brokers are also known to be active in the illegal rental of 
accommodations (Van der Laan, 2006). All the teams of the HSI co-operating mention the 
employment agency sector as one where abuses occur. Two of the examples they provided 
relate to Poles in the meat processing industry who received an advance payment but no fur-
ther payments at all, and Ukrainians who worked for 14 hours a day for €4.50 per hour. The 
Ukrainian workers were accommodated in tents in November and were obliged to buy their 
meals from the gangmasters men they were clearly afraid of, according to the respondent. 
The SIOD also deals with malafide employment agencies. Illegal labour subcontractors, 
whether Dutch or of foreign origins, not only put people to work illegally but trade in false 
documents, underpay (migrant) workers, and house them expensively in accommodation 
that is cramped, dirty or a fire hazard. One investigator reported threats, violence against 
employees and the illegal possession of weapons. The workers concerned were primarily 
men from Brazil, Western Africa, Afghanistan, Turkey, Central and Eastern Europe and 
Portugal. 

                                                                      
36 In 2006, the HSI prepared more than 300 reports for fines for illegal employment, out of about 1,300 

inspections in the agricultural sector. 
37 From an average of €980 to a maximum of €4,000 for an employer who is a natural person and €8,000 for an 

employer who is a legal entity, for each person employed illegally. The fine is increased by 50% if the employer 
has been fined for the same offence before. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 175

Representatives of the employer associations in this sector highlight the responsibility of 
those who hire the employees: they should only do business with certificated employment 
agencies. They also want to distance themselves from exploitative intermediaries supplying 
illegal labour. According to a director of one of the sector organisations, the criminal con-
duct of certain gangmasters is wrongly attributed to the entire sector. This raises questions 
about the self-regulatory powers of the employment agency sector.38,39 The fact is that there 
are malafide labour mediators, who narrow the gap between illegal employment and the 
criminal circuit, which can result in excesses (Van der Leun & Vervoorn, 2004). Sometimes 
there are elusive business practices: small companies regularly operating under different 
names. Other cases, however, involve large-scale employment arrangements. 
 

Case of Portuguese employment agency workers 1 (exploitation) 
A Dutch trade union and a Belgian one collected complaints from Portuguese employment agency 
workers who had worked for the Dutch employment agency D (using no fewer than 250 employees) 
in the Netherlands and in Belgium. D recruited people in Portugal via a local bureau. These Portuguese 
men and women, often from former Portuguese colonies such as Brazil and Mozambique, could work 
in the Netherlands legally as EU citizens. The selection procedure cost €120. Those who were recruited 
travelled to the Netherlands or Belgium at their own expense. If they were accepted upon arrival, they 
signed a Dutch contract which often they did not understand. They agreed, for example, that D would 
receive the tax rebates and that they would only go to general medical practitioners appointed by D, 
with €25 being deducted from their wages for each visit to the doctor. These doctors apparently pro-
vided incorrect diagnoses and allowed D to examine the medical files. They work was in agriculture, 
horticulture, the food industry, construction, metal and timber industries and logistics. D organised ac-
commodation and transport to work. The company had 24 houses, each accommodating 12 workers. 
Former workers indicated that the accommodation was bad. While the employment contract indi-
cated that accommodation would be free, the employees actually paid €75 rental per month. Generally 
speaking, D housed those working in Belgium in the Netherlands, and vice versa. The workers were 
registered at the address of either D or the Portuguese selection bureau, which clouded the situation. 
Any worker who tried to register at the municipality where he lived was threatened with dismissal. 
Working ten hour a day was the norm. Payment for overtime was postponed for as long as possible 
and eventually did not happen at all. Several sick or pregnant workers had to leave just before the ex-
piry of their extendable contract. When they were dismissed, they had to leave the accommodation 
immediately. Those who were pregnant got a bus ticket to Portugal without any explanation of their 
rights. D also apparently employed violent tactics. 

                                                                      
38 The Dutch government wants to address malafide labour subcontractors through the certification of 

employment agencies. 
39 The Gangmaster Licensing Act in the United Kingdom has introduced a licensing obligation for labour 

mediation in certain sectors, and one of its important aims is to counter exploitation: ‘The general purpose of 
this Bill is to make the operation of gangmasters more transparent, thereby ensuring that they comply with the 
legal obligations they owe to their […] workers. The Bill is […] designed to promote the rights of gang workers 
and eliminate forced labour […]’ http://www.eti2.org.uk/Z/lib/2004/02/ukagr-bill/gangmstr-bill-2004-02_no-
tes.pdf. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 176 

In several cases concerning (serious) abuses in the employment agency sector, gangmasters 
from ethnic minority groups recruited staff from their own or a related community. One ex-
ample is the case of a businessman from Afghanistan who put Afghan asylum seekers to 
work under false identities as temporary workers in garden maintenance and carpet clean-
ing. The hourly wage was €4, but this was not always paid. 

Catering 
Abuses in the catering industry occur in a range of establishments. This often involves (a 
combination of) illegal work, underpayment (for example, because wages are continually 
reduced), excessively long days and bad accommodation for the workers. Chinese (take-
away) restaurants form an important subcategory and are therefore discussed separately. 
The BNRM case studies relating to catering often involve an employer and an employee of 
foreign heritage from the same country of origin or with a similar cultural background. 
Sometimes there are family links. It is mainly workers without a social network or with mul-
tiple dependence on the employer who are vulnerable. 
 

Case of Pakistani working conditions (exploitation) 
Some Pakistanis were working in very poor conditions in a hotel: illegally, twelve hours a day on aver-
age, with virtually no days off, and for €100 in cash per week. When the workers came into conflict 
with the employer they were dismissed. The dismissed workers did not report to the police but did 
submit a claim for back wages. When the case came to court, the employer stated that the plaintiffs had 
never worked for him. Witnesses gave contradictory evidence. Those who first confirmed the plain-
tiffs’ story later revoked their statements, possibly due to intimidation on the part of the employer. The 
claim was rejected because of inadequate evidence. 

Chinese restaurants 
Communication with Chinese labour migrants is often difficult. This is partly why the re-
spondents had little understanding of possible arrangements behind the degrading circum-
stances facing some undocumented Chinese workers. Sometimes it seems illegal Chinese 
workers remain silent because, despite bad working and living conditions, they hope to re-
turn to work for their employer in the future. It is also possible that the silence is caused by 
fear of reprisals. This was what was suspected, for example, in the case of a young Chinese 
woman found by the HSI during a workplace check at a restaurant. The woman worked on 
the basis of a forged document and lived above the restaurant. At the police station, she 
stated that she earned a few euros a day. She did not want to say any more. She appeared to 
be afraid and had fresh burn marks on her skin, possibly from cigarettes. The police sus-
pected abuse by her boss but could not continue the investigation without more information 
from the woman. 
The Chinese restaurants where abuse was found often have small numbers of staff and a 
Dutch owner of Chinese origins. It is not unusual for the owner and his family members to 
also work in the business. Some respondents suspect that illegal work under these condi-



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 177

tions in the Chinese catering industry is associated with other criminal activities such as ille-
gal gambling and document fraud. 
According to the respondents, the owners of Chinese restaurants are regularly guilty of un-
derpayment. One team leader at the HSI wrote that even legal employees have to cope with 
poor conditions. Another respondent at the HSI reported that illegally employed cooks earn 
between €400 and €500 per month for six long days each week. It also happens that em-
ployees are paid less than the agreed wages. 
Some people work in the Chinese catering business for only board and lodging. Sometimes 
this is no more than a mattress in the kitchen or an improvised bed in a stockroom. ‘A place 
where a decent person wouldn’t keep his dog’, according to one AMF inspector. During one 
check, several illegal Chinese workers were found to sleep in a stinking shed behind the res-
taurant and with an outside shower. In another restaurant, the HSI happened upon an em-
ployee whose body was covered with scabs. The man had not been treated for this and had 
to keep working. 
 

The case of the Chinese girl (exploitation) 
Y lived with her grandmother in a Chinese village. When she was 11, a man and woman from the vil-
lage offered to take her to Europe with them. Y and her grandmother accepted. During the trip, the 
three pretended to be a family. In the Netherlands, the couple forced Y to work as a prostitute in pri-
vate homes and took all the money. One day Y fled. She did not know where she was and spent the 
night outside. The next day Y went into a Chinese restaurant and asked for work. Y started working 
there for board and lodgings in the same property. She was twice transferred to other Chinese restau-
rants. It is not known whether the restaurants were owned by the same person. Y found the third res-
taurant too harsh and walked out. She had by then worked in restaurants for two months. Y then tried 
to find work at an Italian restaurant. The owner felt this was such a strange request from a child who 
could not speak any Dutch that he took Y home, found an interpreter and contacted the authorities. Y 
was placed in a youth care centre. The Child Welfare Council considered the case and Y ended up with 
a foster family, learned Dutch and went to school. She also received psycho-social help, involving the 
use of (unsent) letters she had written to her grandmother. It is not known whether Y ever contacted 
her grandmother. The respondent thought that no police investigation was initiated in this case. 

Some respondents consider that exploitation in Chinese restaurants is associated with the 
payment of outstanding debts for people smuggling. However, on the basis of court files and 
interviews about the smuggling of Chinese, Soudijn (2006) concludes that such a link can-
not be established. According to him, exploitation by the smuggler himself is only found 
with individualist smugglers who smuggle relatives or acquaintances. The individual smug-
gled may then not need to pay any cash to the smuggler, but instead will work for him for 
very low remuneration. According to Soudijn (2006), restaurant owners sometimes also 
pick up smuggled people who have just arrived in the Netherlands, paying off the debt for 
the smuggling in a lump sum, in exchange for labour. With this sort of structure, it is again 
likely that the person who has been smuggled and the employer will know each other, but 
court files contain little information on these relationships. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 178 

Food industry 
At some bakeries workers earn €20 for a whole night’s work. The HSI discovered a number 
of Bulgarians working illegally at one bakery and living in three rooms above the bakery. 
The rooms, each with two or three mattresses, were in a very poor condition and the inspec-
tors were astonished that people could live there. The migrants did not want to say much 
and appeared to be afraid of their employer/landlord. They did say that they worked twelve 
hours a day, for daily wages of about €30, with rent deducted from that. 
Respondents also reported serious abuse in some fish processing and meat processing 
companies.40 
 

Case of Portuguese employment agency workers 2 (exploitation) 
Serious abuse of Portuguese temp workers was suspected at a chicken slaughterhouse. The manage-
ment at the slaughterhouse was aware of abuses at the employment agency. The Portuguese earned 
€3.50 per hour, their passports were taken away and if they indicated they wanted to work somewhere 
else they were threatened and beaten. The workers were so intimated that they did not dare to leave. 
Nor did they want to say anything about their employer. Violations of the Aliens Employment Act 
were found at the employment agency, along with signs of document fraud. 

Factory work 
Serious abuses may also happen in production work. For example, this is what the HSI dis-
covered in an old factory during a night-time check in collaboration with the Aliens Police. 
 

Living at the workplace 
The dusty space consisted of a workplace, where plaster statuettes were made, and a small improvised 
living space. The sleeping quarters measured sixteen square metres with twelve bunk beds. A small 
hallway contained a gas cylinder camping stove for cooking, and a shower. Ten men and a woman, 
from Bulgaria and Romania, lived and worked here. They worked six days a week and were under the 
impression that the job would take ten weeks. They were in the Netherlands illegally and stated that 
they had had to hand over their passports to the owner of the business. They had been told that they 
would be paid when they left, but they did not know how much. Because they hardly had any cash, they 
were more or less confined to the factory. 

Crime 
It is mentioned in §8.3.3 that criminal activity can, in certain circumstances, amount to forced 
or compulsory services. The following case illustrates that this can happen within a relation-
ship. 
 

                                                                      
40 This has also been found in other countries. In Blood, Sweat, and Fear. Workers’ Rights in U.S. Meat and Poultry 

Plants, Human Rights Watch (2006) describes violations of employment rights in the American meat 
processing industry. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 179 

Case in relation to coerced fraud (exploitation) 
R, an unemployed 34-year woman, had debts and psychological problems when met a Dutch lawyer 
who worked from home. He took pity on R, who moved in with him. They began a relationship, in 
which R was seriously abused physically, sexually and psychologically. Her partner threatened her 
with a knife or by tying her up and pouring methylated spirits over her. R had to receive medical treat-
ment on several occasions and had permanent scars. The man forced R to help him with fraudulent 
practices. For example, he and another man committed forgery, with a view to obtaining compensa-
tion payments. R made several false statements to the courts in this context. R’s partner also saddled 
her with debts, for instance by concluding a loan in her name. R finally ended up in a shelter for bat-
tered women. She reported the abuse to the police, and told about the forgeries. Her ex was convicted 
of abuse and fraud. R now requires long-term assistance. 

Construction 
Remarkably enough, only a few descriptions of serious abuse in the construction industry 
were found in this research. After all, it is well-known, in the Netherlands and surrounding 
countries,41 that there is considerable illegal employment in this sector, which increases the 
risk of abuse. AMF inspectors do point to primarily underpayment and dependence on the 
employer for accommodation in this sector. Polish workers apparently pay a lot for very 
poor accommodation, sometimes in amongst the building materials. According to one team 
leader, underpaid migrant workers are made to do the most unpleasant jobs, such as demoli-
tion, clearing up and steel bending. Not being paid during illness is also mentioned. Some of 
the Poles working in construction in the Netherlands work for private individuals via com-
patriots who find customers through brochures and adverts. 
 

The case of the Ukrainian construction worker (exploitation) 
V, a Ukrainian, was living illegally in the Netherlands and found work with a Belgian contractor, who 
built and renovated houses using between ten and 15 undocumented workers from Eastern Europe on 
each project. They were accommodated in a cabin on the building site. The first week, V received the 
wage that had been agreed. The second week he received half pay, and the third week nothing at all. V 
took photos of his very poor working and living conditions and recorded the employer telling him that 
he would not receive another cent. When V said he would go to the police, the contractor sarcastically 
wished him good luck and told him that he would beat him up if his name was mentioned. V still went 
to the police but he was told that nothing could be done for him as an undocumented migrant worker. 

Transport and logistics 
The HSI discovered undocumented migrants working at one business in this sector in a life-
threatening situation, in a partly burnt-out shed without any form of protection against the 
danger of the building collapsing. There are indications, in the media and elsewhere, of 
abuses in the ports. BNRM noted one case involving an Eritrean, a Somali and two Nigeri-

                                                                      
41 The chief inspector for the Brussels region of the Belgian HSI, for example, indicated that there considerable 

abuse and organised crime connected with illegal employment in construction there (presentation by S. 
Malomgre on 24-03-2006). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 180 

ans who were picked up at night at the asylum centre where they were staying, to clean up 
the engine rooms of ships in the port of Rotterdam. They were poorly paid and, while it is 
not clear that these men were exploited, it is clear that they were vulnerable to exploitation. 

8.6 Groups at risk 

8.6.1 Introduction 

Recognising indicators of exploitation is essential in preventing and combating THB out-
side the sex industry. It is also important for anyone who might encounter victims of labour 
exploitations to be able to recognise them as such. This is not always easy, certainly if the in-
dividual in question does not present himself as a victim. The next section deals with factors 
that render individuals vulnerable to exploitation in employment situations. 

8.6.2 Characteristics of (potential) victims 

For some people any job, no matter how bad the circumstances, presents an opportunity. 
The workers in the various cases described to BNRM were men and women, Dutch nation-
als and foreigners, single people and couples, adults and children. The only characteristic 
they all shared is a marginal position in the Dutch labour market and/or society. 

Nationality 
It is impossible to determine the extent to which nationality increases vulnerability to exploi-
tation. It has already been noted that some national and ethnic communities forge tight-knit 
networks in the Netherlands. Being a member of such a community can be a form of social 
capital, which people can invest when settling in the Netherlands or finding work. At the 
same time, people in this situation can end up being exploited by compatriots or those who 
share their language. An example of this would be the Turkish-speaking Bulgarians who 
were put to work in very bad conditions by malafide Turkish-Dutch gangmasters. 
A wide range of nationalities was found in the BNRM research. The collected cases concern 
Dutch, Portuguese, Polish, Bulgarian, Ukrainian, Georgians and Russians, as well as Moroc-
cans and Algerians, West Africans (including Nigerians), East Africans (including Somalis), 
Congolese, Turks, Iranians, Iraqis, Afghans, Pakistanis, Indians, Chinese and Philippinos. A 
number of countries and regions, such as the Netherlands, Bulgaria and West Africa, are 
known as important countries of origin for victims of THB for sexual exploitation in the 
Netherlands. The countries of origin currently predominant among asylum seekers include 
Iraq, Iran, Afghanistan, China and Somalia. Some victims of exploitation are (ex-)asylum 
seekers. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 181 

Residential status 
Migration policy determines which foreign nationals are allowed access to the Netherlands 
and to the Dutch employment market, and under which conditions. The link between the 
current migration policy and the existence of exploitation outside the sex industry is a com-
plex one. Vulnerability in employment situations cannot always be inferred from illegal resi-
dence, but the restrictive policy on migration does contribute to the fact that there are ex-
tremely vulnerable workers. The more difficult it is for migrants to stay in the Netherlands 
legally, the more those who do come end up in circumstances which easily lead to relation-
ships of dependence and the chance of abuse. Access to the Dutch labour market is also sig-
nificant in this context: there is a risk of exploitation when legal residence does not give 
(adequate) access to the formal labour market. 
The BNRM research indicates that even migrants who are in the Netherlands legally may 
have to deal with abuse, and sometimes excesses, related to work. Circumstances that can 
contribute to their vulnerability, because they weaken their negotiating position in employ-
ment situations, include limited access to the labour market, language difficulties, depend-
ence on fellow-countrymen, ignorance of their rights, a lack of economic alternatives and 
fear of the authorities. 
Some migrants residing legally in the Netherlands are not permitted or have a restricted 
permission to work. First in this group are the asylum seekers. As long as their application is 
being processed, they are not allowed to work. Unaccompanied minor asylum seekers 
(AMAs) are particularly vulnerable.42 In response to indications that recruitment for sexual 
exploitation was going on in asylum reception centres, a plan was developed to provide resi-
dents and workers with better information on THB, to be able to identify problems at an 
earlier stage, to prevent disappearances and to provide adequate assistance in good time. 
This project focuses on exploitation in the sex industry. It is also important, however, to gain 
greater insight into exploitation of asylum seekers from the centres in other sectors. 
Migrants who are here in the Netherlands (legally) for study purposes may work for a 
maximum of ten hours a week. For many students this is not enough to get by. According to 
one respondent, who has many contacts with Russian students in the Netherlands, this leads 
to students entering into marriages of convenience with Dutch nationals, or going into pros-
titution. The students also do other work, for instance in the catering industry, where their 
vulnerable position can be abused. Students may work 20 hours a week, for example, but are 
only on the wages books for ten hours. The other ten hours are underpaid, paid from the 
tips or not paid at all. This does not amount to exploitation, but it illustrates that the labour 
rights of legal immigrants can also be violated. 
The third group of vulnerable immigrants are those from the new EU countries who were 
not allowed to work without a permit in the Netherlands when this Report was written. Al-
lowing these EU citizens to work in the Netherlands, may reduce their dependency on mala-

                                                                      
42 The BNRM research disclosed no cases of exploitation of AMAs. There are, however, indications that dozens 

of Chinese and Indian AMAs have disappeared from reception centres in recent years, some of whom are 
suspected to have ended up being exploited. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 182 

fide facilitators and their vulnerability on the shop floor. But it cannot be predicted what im-
pact the increased freedom of movement for workers within the EU will have on exploita-
tion in other sectors than the sex industry in the Netherlands. The composition of the group 
of risk may just change. After all, exploitative labour subcontractors and employers might 
well turn their attention to those looking for work from countries just beyond the new 
boundaries of the EU. 
Migrants who are free to work are also exploited, for instance because they are ignorant of 
their rights. 
 

Case of the illiterate man (before 2000) 
A, a Moroccan man, worked legally for years in a restaurant, being underpaid. A had a contract but, be-
ing illiterate, he did not understand it. When a lawyer heard how little A was being paid, he sent him to 
his boss with the Collective Labour Agreement, which resulted in A’s dismissal. There followed what 
the lawyer described as a sordid dismissal proceedings, in which the employer appeared to have bribed 
people to say that A had been looking for trouble with one of his colleagues. A’s wage claim was suc-
cessful, however: his boss had to pay him five years’ of back wages. 

Those with a residence permit to stay with a spouse or partner have unlimited access to the 
employment market. But this residential status also has risks attached, because it is depend-
ent, for the first three years, on the relationship for which it is issued. This can result in an 
imbalance of power within families and exploitation, also by abusing the dependence to 
force the other person to work and to hand over all of her income. 
 

Case of being obliged to work and hand over wages (exploitation) 
L, a well-educated Moroccan woman, was legally resident in the Netherlands with her Dutch husband, 
R. When she had met R in Morocco, he had pretended to be wealthier than he really was. In the Neth-
erlands, they shared a room with friends of R. L became pregnant. R forced L, using physical violence, 
to work for him in a factory. L got nothing back from her wages. She did not know what R did with the 
money. Because of R, L became socially isolated. Also, without L’s permission, he made videos of them 
having sex, which he may have sold or shown for payment. L ended up exhausted from the combina-
tion of work, abuse, pregnancy and isolation. She repeatedly reported the abuse. Once her son was 
born, L fled, also because R neglected their child and she herself was unable to buy anything for the 
child without her income. 

Finally, it is evident that people who are in the Netherlands illegally are in a vulnerable posi-
tion that can be abused in employment situations. While employing undocumented mi-
grants does not absolve employers of their obligations to the workers in question, in practice 
they will often underpay them, make them work long hours or worse, without any punish-
ment. Lawyers, HSI inspectors, SIOD investigators and social workers indicate that the in-
dividuals they suspect of being exploited are often very reticent about their situation. Many 
undocumented migrants do not know their (labour) rights, or never dare to broach the sub-
ject with their employers. After all, for every one of them, there are a dozen others. They 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 183 

also generally want to stay out of the spotlight. If they get accommodation from their em-
ployers and know few people in the Netherlands, they have even more to lose. If an un-
documented worker does protest about bad working conditions, some employers will 
threaten to report them to the Aliens Police, or actually do.43 
 

Case of not lodging a wage claim (no exploitation) 
14 men employed illegally were placed in aliens’ detention following a workplace check at a container 
transhipment company. They all mentioned (the first name of) the same intermediary, who had in-
structed them to wait in a particular spot from which they were taken to work in a different city. They 
did heavy loading and unloading work. The men did this for only two days, by their own account. An 
hourly wage of €5 had been agreed, but they had not yet received anything. The lawyer suggested a to 
claim back wages, but the men did not want this. It is not clear whether this was because they did not 
know from whom to claim the wages, because of fear, or maybe the hope of getting back to the same 
work. 

What happens if an undocumented migrant wants to report abuse in his employment situa-
tion to the police? Various respondents indicate that the police will not record the report, or 
indicate that there is nothing they can do for an undocumented migrant. Sometimes the at-
tempt to report an offence leads to aliens’ detention. 
 

Case of the Algerian undocumented migrant (exploitation) 
The Algerian Y was illegally resident in the Netherlands and worked in a tearoom. At first he was paid 
regularly but his wages gradually diminished and eventually he received no more pay. When Y took 
this up with his employer, the latter threatened to kill him. Y took the threat seriously and went to the 
police. He was taken into aliens’ detention. It is not known whether any investigation was started into 
the employer. 

Gender 
Undocumented migrants therefore form an important risk group. According to Leun and 
Vervoorn (2004), between a half and three quarters of this group probably consists of men. 
Boys are also in the majority among unaccompanied minor asylum seekers. It is therefore to 
be expected that more men than women will fall victim to exploitation in sectors other than 
the sex industry. BNRM subscribes to the expectation that the numerical relationship be-
tween men and women among (potential) victims will have changed radically with the in-
troduction of the new Article on THB. This has consequences for how the problem is to be 
addressed, particularly as regards the reception of victims. In 2006, the STV repeatedly indi-
cated that the number of reports of exploitation other than in the sex industry, as well as the 
number of male victims, was growing, and that there were problems in accommodation and 
assistance for male victims. 

                                                                      
43 In Belgium, there a strong correlation between informing the authorities about undocumented migrants and 

labour exploitation (CGKR, 2005, p. 72). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 184 

Age 
Minors generally encounter multiple dependence issues more quickly, and are more vulner-
able than adults. Exploited children are also denied rights that are specifically applicable to 
them, such as the right to education. Children therefore need extra protection. The legisla-
ture has taken this into account in the provisions on THB and on the employment of mi-
nors. The use of coercion is not a required element as regards trafficking in minors, contrary 
to trafficking in adults. At the same time it is clear that no every situation of working chil-
dren amounts to exploitation. But there are special conditions applicable to work done by 
children. The Working Hours Act [Arbeidstijdenwet] and the Working Conditions Decree 
[Arbeidsomstandighedenbesluit] both specify, for a range of age groups up to the age of 18, 
what work can be done, for how many hours and at what times. If an employer makes a child 
work longer or harder, then this is an abuse which, possibly in combination with others, 
might amount to an excess. 
International courts also take minority into account in these matters. For example, in the Si-
liadin judgment of the ECHR, mentioned earlier, the age of the domestic worker played a 
part in establishing forced labour and services. The Court stated that in particular children 
and other vulnerable individuals are entitled to protection from the State against such viola-
tions of personal integrity. The standard, therefore, within the Dutch and European legal 
order, is that minors have to be protected so that their fundamental rights (of the child) are 
not infringed upon as a result of employment. 
In practice, however, additional care for (possible) victims below the age of 18 is not yet a 
given fact. Several cases from the BNRM research show that illegal residence in particular 
can hamper the attention that is required in terms of alert, reception and assistance, also to 
report the offence, to (possibly) exploited children. 
 

Case of the Chinese boy (exploitation) 
A duty lawyer met C, a Chinese boy. He said he was 15 years old. The lawyer reckoned he was between 
15 and 17. C had been apprehended during a traffic check, because he could not produce any personal 
identification. The Dutch driver next to him did have ID and was allowed to continue his journey. C 
was taken to the police station, where he was kept for a couple of days in a police cell and then trans-
ferred to aliens’ detention. C appeared shy and not particularly talkative, but said that he had been 
smuggled into the Netherlands a few years previously, had no family here but was in touch with his 
family in China, shared a room with another man somewhere and worked in a place he was taken to 
and collected from by car. The lawyer did not find out anything about the nature of the work, but he 
got the impression that apart from working the boy did nothing but eat and sleep. He did not speak a 
word of Dutch or another European language, appeared to be disoriented and knew nothing about 
Dutch society. 
For his trip, C had borrowed the equivalent of €10,000 from a loan shark. He had a scar in the shape of 
a flower on his arm, C said that this was done to him to remind him of the debt. C was not paid for his 
work, but the person he worked for had said that he was sending money to C’s family in China every 
month, and so C wanted to get back to work as fast as possible. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 185 

The lawyer spoke to C only once. Because of the transfer to aliens’ detention, he did not visit the boy 
again before the hearing. The Aliens Police interviewed C twice. The lawyer consulted with the Child 
Protection Agency, which was willing to process an application to place C under supervision urgently. 
The lawyer did not want to start this procedure, however, without consulting C, but there was no fur-
ther opportunity to do so. At the hearing, it becomes clear that C had not been brought to, or formally 
been presented to the court. Because of this procedural error, the detention was lifted and C was put 
on the street. The lawyer, who expressed his concern at this state of affairs, was informed that the 
Aliens Police had invited his client to report the next day, following the lifting of his detention. The 
chance that C had understood this was fairly remote, since he did not understand Dutch and presuma-
bly no interpreter had been used. 

This case raises some questions, for instance why the police let the car driver go. It is alarm-
ing that an unaccompanied minor, who does not speak any Dutch, should be in a police cell 
for a few days, followed by aliens’detention and finally put out on the street. The lawyer felt 
he was faced with a dilemma in this case. What is in the client’s interests, if the client is 15 
years old and indicates that he wants to return to what was probably a perilous situation, 
possibly involving exploitation?  
It is apparent from different cases that the Child Protection Agency does not always re-
spond consistently to the (possible) exploitation of minors. The different responses may 
have to do with the fact that it is not always possible in practice to strike a proper balance be-
tween child protection law on the one hand and migration law on the other (Cardol, 2005). 
Dutch child protection measures can be applied to foreign children in the Netherlands irre-
spective of their residential status. The Agency's policy in relation to undocumented minors 
is no different from their policy in relation to minors residing legally in the Netherlands 
(Cardol, 2005). But, according to Cardol, the Agency has indicated that there may be some 
inconsistency in implementation if there is a clash between migration policy and policy on 
child protection. In his view, in practice, the rule seems to be that migration law takes prece-
dence over youth protection, and also that those involved in youth protection are not always 
sufficiently familiar with migration law. Anyone who might become involved with unac-
companied underage migrants must be familiar with (the signs of) various forms of THB 
and the appropriate protective measures. 

Socio-psychological condition 
One special group of potential victims of labour exploitation are those with socio-
psychological problems. Some employers abuse people who are extremely unassertive, or 
who have to cope with personality disorders. This form of vulnerability partly explains why 
BNRM also found cases relating to Dutch nationals. Limited social understanding, which 
involves a certain degree of self-protection, can result in serious wrongs in relation to em-
ployment, for example when combined with money worries and social isolation. 

What all of this shows is that the composition of the group of (potential) victims has been 
changed by the broadening of the scope of the criminalisation of THB. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 186

8.6.3 Characteristics of (potential) perpetrators 

Because of the central questions and methods applied in the BNRM research into labour 
exploitation, limited information was collected on the individuals responsible for serious 
abuse in employment situations, Most of the information that was collected was obtained 
from HSI and SIOD respondents. 

Other criminal conduct 
Respondents from the HSI and the SIOD indicate that the businesses where they find the 
most serious abuses, and also the managers there, were not particularly concerned with ob-
serving laws and regulations in general. One AMF team leader gave the example of a com-
pany which, apart from illegal employment in bad conditions, was also suspected of violat-
ing environmental, social security and tax laws. 

Staff 
The research gives no insight into any link between the size of the staff of businesses and the 
occurrence of exploitation. Serious abuses occur in small and informal businesses as well as 
in major enterprises. 

Cultural relationships with victims 
It is known from various studies on people smuggling that the perpetrators of this crime of-
ten have the same ethnic background as the people they smuggle (Van der Leun & Ver-
voorn, 2004). This also seems to apply to human traffickers and their victims of exploitation 
in other sectors than the sex industry. 

Relatives and partners 
Sometimes the relationship between perpetrator and victim is even closer. Exploitation oc-
curs within relationships, marriages and families, often in combination with multiple de-
pendence, abuse of an imbalance of power in the relationship and mental or physical vio-
lence. Several of the BNRM case studies show that there is not always an adequate response 
to signs of exploitation in the family context, even when the victims are minors. 

8.7 Points of attention and bottlenecks when dealing with exploitation 
outside the sex industry 

8.7.1 Introduction 

An effective approach to THB for non-sexual exploitation should cover prevention, detec-
tion and investigation, the prosecution of suspects and protection for victims. Policy in this 
area coincides broadly with that in relation to THB for sexual exploitation. It does, however, 
involve some different cooperating agencies. 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 187 

Fighting exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry is still in the early stages. The first 
steps towards its prevention were taken in early 2007 by the Ministry of Social Affairs and 
Employment and the social partners, in the context of the flanking policy for the free 
movement of workers from countries that had become EU member states in 2004. Refer-
ence is made to Chapter 5 for the issues of highlighting exploitation outside the sex industry, 
which is now getting into its stride, and the first investigations in this field. At the time when 
this chapter was being written, there were no irrevocable court verdicts on this form of THB 
yet.44 There is not yet enough material to assess prosecution practice either, but BNRM will 
be carefully following the case law on exploitation outside the sex industry. Reference can be 
made to the lengthier experience in Belgium: the CGKR (2005) confirms that not every Bel-
gian court yet views exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry as THB, and that the 
courts’ sensitivity to this issue needs to be improved.45 The STV has registered the first (pos-
sible) victims of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. This means that the STV, 
and other organisations involved in providing assistance to victims of THB, have to deal 
with changed client profiles and new requests for help. 

8.7.2 Points of attention and bottlenecks 

This section includes a number of points for attention and bottlenecks in relation to dealing 
with THB for exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. 

Legislation and policy 
– When the criminalisation of THB was extended, the legislature failed to make it suffi-

ciently clear which abuses in relation to labour or services should be qualified as exploita-
tion within the meaning of THB. The lack of a clear definition of ‘exploitation’ impedes 
the identification, investigation and prosecution of non-sexual exploitation. 

– The extension of the scope of the offence demands – even more than before – a targeted 
cooperation among the various government departments, to achieve an effective THB 
policy. 

Prevention on the demand side 
– There has as yet been little action on the government's own proposal to try, in consulta-

tion with employer and employee organisations, to reduce the levels of the demand that 
can result in exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry.46  

                                                                      
44 When this chapter was completed, two verdicts at first instance had been handed down. These cases involved 

the illegal employment of Bulgarians as hemp pickers and of Chinese in a restaurant. In both cases, the accused 
were exonerated at first instance on charges of THB. 

45 Various initiatives were being prepared in the Netherlands, at the time when this Report was being compiled, 
to provide training on THB to judges, and these initiatives will also deal with exploitation in other sectors than 
the sex industry. 

46 In the Additional Measures to the NAM. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 188 

Identifying and investigating possible THB situations 
– The wider public is ignorant about exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry and 

the fact that this is punishable as THB, which reduces the general alertness. There is also a 
lack of awareness of this criminalisation of labour exploitation among those who might 
encounter signs of it in their (voluntary) work, such as trade union employees, (youth) so-
cial workers, lawyers and those support asylum seekers or undocumented migrants. 

– A great deal of attention and capacity have been applied in recent years to combating ille-
gality. The aim of this policy is twofold: on the one hand to deport undocumented mi-
grants and on the other hand to deal with those who exploit these people. Dealing with il-
legality and combating THB are two separate policy fields, but measures in one field may 
impact on the other. On paper, it is recognised that there may be victims of THB among 
undocumented migrants, but it is essential for this to be also taken into account in practice. 
There is, after all, a risk that victims of exploitation will simply be viewed as illegal work-
ers. A victim-oriented approach to THB requires that in any campaign to combat illegality 
(possible) victims should be recognised as such, and informed of their rights, for example 
to make use of the B-9 regulation. 

– There are signs that the police do not always take action when undocumented migrants 
want to report a crime, although the police are obliged to record reports. 

– Because of the part it has to play in combating illegal employment, the HSI is not always in 
a position to protect illegal employees effectively against exploitative working conditions. 
Terminating an illegal employment situation can be incompatible with gaining the trust of 
a (possible) victim of THB. The twofold duties of the HSI mean that undocumented mi-
grants will not be inclined to report abuses or accidents at the workplace to the HSI. 
Workplace checks by the HSI are, however, an important potential source of information 
on exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. But checking on infringements of 
the Aliens Employment Act will only contribute towards ending exploitative situations if 
signs of serious abuse are picked up and reported to the SIOD. If this does not happen, it 
could even be the case that an employer might ‘recover’ the fine for illegal employment 
from his illegal employees. 

Risk sectors 
– There is a link between the relatively high degree of illegal employment in certain sectors 

and the chance of serious abuses.  
– Ethnic entrepreneurship can provide a hidden circuit in which exploitation can go on rela-

tively unobserved. 
– Labour exploitation can occur partly in the Netherlands and partly across the border. 
– Exploitation outside the sex industry is taking place in the informal sector as well, includ-

ing domestic work. This sector is not readily accessible to either inspection and (special) 
investigation services or trade unions. 

– Au pairs are vulnerable to exploitation, because of their multiple dependence on the host 
family and the fact that they work in a private environment. There is little understanding 



EXPLOITATION IN SECTORS OTHER THAN THE SEX INDUSTRY 

 189

of the employment situations of the most vulnerable au pairs, namely those who do not or 
no longer comply with the conditions of the au pair permit. 

– There is no supervision with regard to the actual working situations of the very vulnerable 
migrant domestic workers who are employed by foreign diplomats. 

– Deregulation of the employment market is part of the explanation for the existence of ex-
tremely poor working conditions in the industrialised nations (ILO, 2005). The employ-
ment agency sector, deregulated in 1998, is a significant risk sector for exploitation. Yet 
the existence of serious abuses plays no great part in the political debate on (self-)regula-
tion of the sector, or how to deal with malafide labour subcontractors. 

Groups at risk and victims 
– The position of undocumented migrants in the Dutch employment market appears to 

have deteriorated in recent years. Illegal work seems to be going further underground, 
leading to more work situations that can turn into exploitation. Many (undocumented) 
migrants know (too) little about their rights as employees. A (possible) victim of exploita-
tion outside the sex industry will often have no idea that he has certain rights under the B-
9 regulation. It is also difficult in many cases to gain the trust of a (possible) victim, cer-
tainly if he is residing in the Netherlands illegally and/or his trust in the authorities has 
been damaged in the past (Skrivánková, 2006). 

– The continued expansion of the EU and the end of the transitional provisions in relation 
to workers from new EU member states will not mark the end of illegal employment or 
exploitation. In a globalised world with increasing international competition, inequality 
and mobility, it seems more likely that the countries of origin of the vulnerable labour mi-
grants will continue to shift. 

– Migrants who come to the Netherlands for family formation or reunification have free ac-
cess to the labour market. Their residence permit carries the risk, however, of abuse of the 
dependence on relationships or family ties under migration law, which sometimes lead to 
exploitation. 

– The government acknowledges that minors are particularly vulnerable and that underage 
victims of THB deserve special attention. Nevertheless, the illegal status of a minor some-
times seems to be a hindrance to securing accommodation in a shelter, legal assistance 
and, if necessary, a child protection order. 

– The extension of the Article on THB has introduced new categories of victims, but it has 
so far not resulted in an expansion or differentiation of the reception and shelter facilities 
for victims.  

– Social workers and legal assistance providers who are in contact with the most vulnerable 
individuals in the employment market can highlight possible THB cases. One difficulty, 
however, is that the fear of undocumented migrants to be deported will often deter these 
professionals from reporting exploitative practices. This attitude is only likely to change if 
social workers and legal assistance providers can be sure that reporting labour exploita-
tion will be in the interests of their client. Sometimes there are (also) other legal actions 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 190 

that migrants can take against an employer without risking disclosure of their illegal resi-
dence. It is important for those who provide (legal) assistance to be aware of these possi-
bilities and not to advise against them unnecessarily. 

 



 191 

9 
 Trafficking in Human Beings for the Purpose  

of Organ Removal 

9.1 Introduction 

Since the expansion of the definition of the offence on 1 January 2005, trafficking in human 
beings (THB) can also be aimed at the removal of another person’s organs. So far, though, 
there are virtually no indications that this type of THB takes place in the Netherlands. Nev-
ertheless, the new THB provision prompted BNRM to look into this topic. BNRM opted 
for a broad survey, because the demand for organs can lead to commercial organ trans-
plants, i.e. the trade in organs, as well as to THB with a view to organ removal.1 
 

Terminology used by BNRM 
- Organ: component of the human body or the human foetus, excluding blood and reproductive cells.2 
- Organ transplant: the entire process from preparation for the operation to transfer of an organ from 

one human to another, including any interim conservation and storage of the organ.3 
- Organ tourism: travelling abroad in order to obtain an organ (for) transplant. 
- Trade in organs: offering for sale and actually selling an organ, buying an organ and also mediating 

between a purchaser and a seller with a view to profit, including the actual transplant of a such an or-
gan. 

- THB with a view to organ removal: recruiting, transporting or accommodating another person with 
the use of force and the purpose of removing that person’s organ(s). 

The BNRM investigation into the subject was twofold. Firstly, it included a study of the lit-
erature4 exploring the statutory framework for organ transplants in the Netherlands, the in-
ternational trade in organs, the question whether Dutch citizens are involved in this and the 
ethical debate on the various ways in which organs can be made available for transplant. The 
second element of the investigation involved interviewing transplant surgeons and trans-
plant coordinators, and focussed on the question of whether there are any Dutch kidney pa-
tients who want to, have tried to or actually have succeeded in buying a kidney for trans-
plant, either in the Netherlands or abroad.5 

                                                                      
1 The shortage of organs available for transplantation also leads to research into possible alternatives for human-

to-human transplants, such as xenotransplants and artificial organs. 
2 In line with the definition used in the Explanatory Memorandum to the Organ Donation Act [Wet op de 

orgaandonatie (WOD)]. In legal terms the concept covers more than it does in its standard medical meaning. 
3 This definition follows the Council of Europe’s Additional Protocol to the Convention on human rights and 

biomedicine, on transplantation of organs and tissues of human origin (2002). 
4 Apart from scientific literature, informational booklets and legislation and regulations, media reports and 

internet sites were studied in order to find more case-oriented information, including ‘urban myths’ about the 
trade in organs. 

5 The BNRM investigation concentrated on kidneys as these are in shortest supply, most of the literature is about 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 192 

The central issues in this Chapter are the connections and distinctions between the trade in 
organs on the one hand and THB with a view to organ removal on the other hand. It also 
deals with legislation on organ donation, and the debate about and of symptoms of the 
commercialization of organ donation. 

9.2 State of affairs and developments 

Virtually no research has been done on the involvement of Dutch citizens in organ tourism, 
trade in organs or THB with a view to organ removal. There are as yet very few indications 
of any trade in organs or THB with a view to organ removal in the Netherlands.6 According 
to the National Institute for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention [Nationaal Instituut 
voor Gezondheidsbevordering en Ziektepreventie (NIGZ)], the origins of every organ trans-
planted in the Netherlands are known, and the registration and control systems leave no 
room for a ‘black market’ in organs. Van der Leun and Vervoorn (2004) as well as the Board 
of Procurators-General, in the THB Instruction [Aanwijzing Mensenhandel (2006)] also con-
clude that the practice of trade in organs appears to be non-existent in the Netherlands. 
At the same time it is quite conceivable that long waiting times for organs in the Nether-
lands7 and the ease of public access to information on the trade in organs abroad may al-
ready have led Dutch citizens to get involved in organ tourism, or at least that this might 
happen in future. After all, there is a significant shortage of available organs in the Nether-
lands, as in many other countries, for the increasing numbers of patients awaiting a trans-
plant,8 with the result that one in five of these patients dies before a transplant can take place 
(Van Schravendijk, 2006). IJzermans, who is a professor of transplant surgery, indicated in 
2005 that organ tourism can be anticipated if the number of organs from living donors does 
not increase. He referred to opportunities for buying organs in Hungary and (the former) 
Yugoslavia. Two medical specialists reported in the media in January 2006 that some pa-
tients had arranged organ transplants in China.  

9.2.1 Organ donation and trade in organs 

The donor registration system 
There is a passive donor registration system in the Netherlands. This is also called a consent 
system, as any organ removal (after death)9 requires explicit consent. There is no obligation 

                                                                      
kidney transplants and the greatest likelihood of THB with a view to organ removal would seem to centre 
around kidneys. 

6 Akinbingöl (2003), however, suggests that some migrants smuggled from Turkey to Western Europe have 
financed their trip by selling an organ. 

7 An average of four years for a donor kidney transplant. 
8 About 1,440 people were waiting for an organ at the end of 2006, of whom more than 1,050 were waiting for a 

kidney. 370 people were awaiting tissue (other than skin). 567 organs from deceased donors and 277 organs 
from living donors were transplanted in 2006, and tissue (excluding skin) was transplanted more than 2,100 
times (www.transplantatiestichting.nl). 

9 Post mortem non-heart beating donation is allowed and sometimes heart-beating donation.  



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS FOR THE PURPOSE OF ORGAN REMOVAL 

 193 

to register one’s consent or objection, and anyone who has not made his choice known is 
presumed not to be available as a donor.10 An alternative system is the active donor or non-
objection system. The principle here is that everyone is presumed to be a donor unless they 
have registered an objection. There has been a lot of political debate in recent years on the 
pros and cons of the Dutch donor registration system. This has not resulted in any funda-
mental changes, however. 

The Organ Donation Act 
The statutory rules on the removal of organs from humans are set out in the Organ Dona-
tion Act [Wet op de orgaandonatie (WOD)]. The most important conditions imposed by the 
WOD are express prior consent from the donor11 and provision of the organ free of 
charge.12 This is an attempt, according to the WOD Explanatory Memorandum, to protect 
the inviolability of the human body and the right to self-determination, both of which con-
tinue beyond the point of death to some extent, as well as a fair distribution of available or-
gans. As far as living organ donation is concerned, the donor must be in a position to give 
consent, having been adequately informed, for the removal of a specific organ for transplan-
tation (Articles 3 (1) and 8, WOD).13 The provision of organs after death also requires in 
principle the donor’s consent or, in the absence of any declaration of will, consent from the 
deceased’s nearest surviving relative(s). 
Consent for organ removal is void if it is given in order to obtain a payment for to donation, 
which is higher than the costs directly resulting from the removal. One reason for this is that 
the legislator considers that a donor’s free will is not guaranteed if there is a profit motive.14 
There may also then be a danger of exploitation (WOD Explanatory Memorandum). Nor 
may there be any profit motive for the organ centre or organ banks15 mediating in obtaining, 
typing, transporting and allocating organs or involved in transporting, storing, processing, 
transferring or implanting bodily materials. 
The WOD contains a penal provision (Article 32), specifying that whoever intentionally re-
moves an organ during life or after death without consent in terms of the WOD will be li-

                                                                      
10 More than 5 million people have had their preference on donation registered in the Netherlands. Nearly half of 

these have permitted unrestricted donation. About 10% have allowed donation with restrictions, about 12% 
have left the decision to their surviving relatives or a specific individual and more than 30% have withheld 
consent (www.donorregister.nl). 

11 There are additional conditions for donation by a minor. 
12 Only those costs which are a direct result of the donation, including lost income, can be compensated. 
13 Living donation generally occurs with a sick family member or partner. If this is impossible, due to 

incompatibility of blood groups between donor and recipient, it is sometimes possible to undertake cross-over 
transplants: the exchange of donor organs between two or more donor/recipient pairs (Den Hartogh, 2003). 

14 This is also an argument against the commercialization of organ donation for the World Medical Association: 
“Payment for organs and tissues for donation and transplantation should be prohibited. A financial incentive 
compromises the voluntariness of the choice and the altruistic basis for organ and tissue donation. 
Furthermore, access to needed medical treatment based on ability to pay is inconsistent with the principles of 
justice.” (http://www.wma.net/e/policy/wma.htm). 

15 The Netherlands Transplantation Foundation is the only organ centre in the Netherlands. It is affiliated to the 
international donation programmes of Eurotransplant and Bio Implant Services. There are six organ banks in the 
Netherlands. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 194 

able to a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year and a fourth category fine. The re-
moval of organs from a living person without permission is in certain circumstances also 
covered by the THB provision (Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code), which provides for a far 
more serious sentence, i.e. a maximum of six years’ imprisonment and a fifth category fine.16 
The penal provision in the WOD also covers those mediating between donors and recipi-
ents if the payment involved is higher than the costs incurred, and also those openly offering 
or asking such a payment for an organ. 

Trade in organs 
The trade in organs includes offer an organ for sale or selling or purchasing an organ and 
mediating between the seller and purchaser of an organ with a view to obtain profit. It will 
often involve desperate patients whose life or quality of life is seriously threatened, on the 
one hand, and people who are prepared to sell a part of their body, for instance because of 
extreme poverty or a lack of any alternative means to generate an income. Third parties are 
always involved in this trade, doctors, but often brokers as well. Organ trade is not permitted 
in the Netherlands, regardless of voluntariness on the part of the seller and purchaser. There 
is an ongoing debate on the desirability of market forces in this field. 
 

The medical-ethical debate on trade in organs 
A range of moral standpoints are adopted in the debate on commercial organ transplants. Scheper-
Hughes (2002), a professor of anthropology and chairman of Organs Watch, a research project into 
human rights and organ transplants, calls trade in organs ‘neo-cannibalism’. She argues that the com-
mercialisation of the human body makes exploitation inevitable and focuses on grotesque abuses in 
this ‘market sector’. 
Del Monico is also a fervent opponent of allowing paid organ transplants. ‘The poor will remain poor, 
but lose their health and organs in the process of government authorized exploitation of the poor’, ac-
cording to him (2004). 
Den Hartogh and Hilhorst offer different views on the issue of allowing trade or exchange of organs. 
Den Hartogh, a professor of ethics, does not regard commercialism as objectionable per se, and criti-
cises a number of objections made about the concept. One objection to market allocation is that access 
may come to depend on the depth of one’s pocket rather than on purely medical factors, but Den Har-
togh does not rule out the possibility of the Netherlands Transplantation Foundation buying in (some 
of) the organs that are needed to redistribute them on medical grounds. Den Hartogh (2003) refutes on 
theoretical grounds the arguments that ‘poor people will be forced into doing things that are harmful 
to them’ and that ‘if we permit a market, we cannot protest against developing countries doing the 
same, where the poor will certainly be exploited’. He feels that the key objection to commercialisation 
is that organs, because of their symbolic value, are not the kind of thing for which a market should be 
allowed to develop. But where one sets the boundary around what can be bought for money is a matter 
partly of convention and partly of personal ethics (Den Hartogh, 2003). 
The medical ethicist Hilhorst (2003) describes it as ‘incomprehensible, unnecessary and unacceptable’ 
that the trade in organs is banned in the Netherlands while the government is failing to resolve the 

                                                                      
16 If the offence results in serious physical injury or death, the maximum penalties are twelve and 15 years’ 

imprisonment respectively (Art. 273f (5) and (6) Dutch Criminal Code). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS FOR THE PURPOSE OF ORGAN REMOVAL 

 195 

shortage of organs. If the government cannot meet this need, he argues, then it should not frustrate the 
alternative offered by trade in organs. 
However, the voluntary sale of organs does not alter the fact that trade in organs can in practice imply 
(health) risks for the sellers, certainly if they are affected by poverty. There can, for instance, be serious 
medical and economic consequences to organ removal without (proper) aftercare.17 Awareness of the 
risks may influence society’s acceptance of trade in organs. 
Apart from the dangers inherent for organ sellers, in a world with major socio-economic inequality, 
one objection against commercialisation is that it undermines a fair distribution of the available organs. 
Thus the Dutch legislator considers that this costly and scarce form of healthcare should not be re-
served to those who are well-to-do (WOD Explanatory Memorandum). The medical specialists 
Friedman and Friedman (2006), on the other hand, claim that is exactly what is already happening on 
the black market for organs, which has come into being because of the shortage of donors. They argue 
for the regulation of organ donation in America through a national institute and legalisation on pay-
ment of a market price for a kidney.18 

Organ donation and trade in organs abroad 
The removal and allocation of organs is regulated in most Western countries, as in the Neth-
erlands, in such a way that they may only be donated and transplanted voluntarily and free of 
charge, whether during life or on death. According to the NIGZ, this means that there is no 
trade in organs in Western Europe. European countries do have differing donor registration 
systems and different (relative) numbers of transplant operations being undertaken.19 
Countries in other parts of the world also have legislation on organ donation, but in certain 
countries it apparently is being circumvented.20 Possible explanations for this include pov-
erty and a lack of prospects among potential ‘donors’, inadequate control within the medical 
world and corruption. Rothman and Rothman (2003) suggest, for example, that illegal trade 
in organs in Thailand developed due to the lack of a national organ register, and a health care 
inspectorate that only acts upon complaints. 
It is worth mentioning here the media reports from October 2006 that seven funeral under-
takers in New York State allegedly removed and sold bones and organs from hundreds of 
corpses, without consent. 

                                                                      
17 Goyal et al. (2002) show that the financial situation of Indians who had sold a kidney had not improved, or had 

even deteriorated. Pearson (2004) refers to the research done by Zargooshi (2001), reaching the same 
conclusion about Iranians who had sold a kidney.  

18 Commercialisation of organ transplants can take various forms, for instance post mortem donation in 
exchange for payment of burial costs to the surviving relatives (Häyry, 2004, referring to Rothman, 2002). 

19 There is no direct relationship between donor registration systems and the number of donations. Other factors 
also determine the number of possible transplants. One such factor is the number of road traffic fatalities, 
which is relatively low in the Netherlands (Coppen, 2003). In practice, the consent of surviving relatives also 
appears to be a determining factor in the Netherlands, irrespective of the deceased’s donor registration status: 
no transplant will take place without their consent. 

20 According to Pearson (2004), research by Organ Watch shows that there is an illegal trade in organs in Cuba, 
Brazil, Argentina, India, Iran, Israel, Palestine, Moldavia, Romania, the Philippines, Russia, Turkey, the USA 
and South Africa. Häyry (2004) mentions some of these countries and also Thailand, Egypt, Iraq, Peru and 
Estonia. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 196 

According to Pearson (2004), trade in organs is only formally permitted in Iran and the Phil-
ippines. Rothman and Rothman (2006) outline a picture of doctors, politicians and scien-
tists in the Philippines regarding this as quite acceptable that in practice this means that poor 
slum dwellers in particular sell their kidneys to wealthy kidney patients. It is known that or-
gans from executed prisoners have been used for transplants in China, also for foreign re-
cipients (Häyry, 2004, referring to Guttmann, 1992). The Chinese authorities are apparently 
also responsible for organ removal from executed prisoners without their consent, which is 
required by law (Amnesty International, 2004; Bellagio Task Force, 1997). In some cases, 
those sentenced to death and their relatives were not consulted, while in other cases the sur-
viving relatives received a monetary payment (Human Rights Watch, 1994).21 Perhaps be-
cause of these practices, foreign visitors to China can arrange for a purchased kidney to be 
transplanted within a few weeks. 
 

A look at the internet22 
‘If you send your personal data to this center by e-mail of fax and accept the necessary body examina-
tion in Shanyang, China in order to assure a suitable donor, it may take only one month to receive a 
liver transplantation, the maximum waiting time being two months. As for the kidney transplantation, 
it may take only one week to find a suitable donor, the maximum waiting time being one month.’ 
http://en.zoukiishoku.com/list/volunteer.htm 
 
‘Are you sick of waiting for an organ transplant? For those awaited kidney patients, we understand live 
is not mean to be sick all the time, if you or your loved ones has End Stage Renal Failure or Liver or 
Heart Failure, time is precious. The longer you wait the worth your health will deteriorate. With the in-
creasing gap between donor and patient numbers, for some, waiting is no longer an option. As one of 
the prominent organ transplant coordinator in China, we can provide you the highest standards of 
service with minimal risk. Our transplantation programs include kidney, pancreas, liver, heart and 
lung. … We then arrange consultation with your surgeon and physician to discuses your most optimal 
surgery plan. Until such point, you are free of charge. When you do give us the go ahead, a small nonre-
fundable booking fee of $1,000 along with your application form and your blood type, HLA Type de-
tail have to be logged. We will search our transplant hospital network for the highest blood type and 
HLA (tissue type) match and inform you the first available surgery date, it could be from a couple of 
weeks to a few months, depending on availability of your match.’ 
http://www.newlifetransplant.com 
 
‘Do the organs come from a alive or dead donors? The donor organs come from people that are exe-
cuted in China. … What are the costs and what does that include? Kidney transplant cost for non Chi-
nese citizens: US$80,000, US$75,000 (under 60 years old). Please note that for kidney transplant, if 
your blood type is O then an additional charge of US$5,000 needs to be added. Liver transplant cost 
for non Chinese citizens: US$135,000, US$ 120,000 (under 60 years old). The above price covers the 
new organs, priority on the waiting list, the transplant surgery, hospital stay, interpreter e.t.c. It does 

                                                                      
21 According to persistent but unverifiable reports, many of the transplanted organs in China are taken from the 

supporters of Falun Gong. See Matas & Kilgour (2007) and http://investigation.go.saveinter.net/Kilgour-
Matas-organ-harvesting-rpt-July6-eng.pdf. 

22 These sites were most recently consulted on 15 February 2007. Language errors on the sites were not corrected. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS FOR THE PURPOSE OF ORGAN REMOVAL 

 197 

not cover, your travel costs, hotel stay, transportation. Note: If the patient’s function of the heart and 
lungs is poor, the patient has diabetes and/or high blood preasure and if the patient’s condition is bad, 
an additional charge might be added.’ 
http://www.bek-transplant.com 

The Chinese government amended the legislation on organ transplants in 2006 by means of 
a temporary regulation, followed by new legislation in April 2007.23 

The extent to which various countries are involved in international organ trade, as a country 
of origin for either organ suppliers or organ tourists, is determined not only by legislation, 
other government involvement and discrepancies in levels of welfare, but also by religious 
or other culturally determined concepts concerning the human body. 

Dutch patients who travel abroad to have an organ transplant are not, in principle, guilty of 
any criminal offence under Dutch criminal law. This is different if the situation involves 
THB with a view to organ removal. 

9.2.2 THB with a view to organ removal 

Article 273f (1)(1) Dutch Criminal Code prohibits the recruitment, transportation or accom-
modating of another person with the purpose of removing that person’s organ(s) when 
force, which can take on the form of, for instance, deception, is used. Sub-paragraphs 2, 4, 5, 
7 and 9 of paragraph 1 also describe transactions aimed at organ removal or profiting from 
organ removal. The Palermo Protocol and the EU Framework Decision, on which Article 
273f Dutch Criminal Code is based, differ on the point of organ removal. Whereas the Pro-
tocol (Article 3) classifies it as a form of exploitation, it is not included in the Framework De-
cision. This is why the Dutch legislator included organ removal in addition to exploitation in 
the THB provision (Explanatory Memorandum). 
More fundamental is the distinction between trade in organs on the one hand and THB with 
a view to organ removal on the other. The essence of trade in organs is the profit motive, and 
the rationale of the penal provision in the WOD is to counteract commercial transplant ac-
tivities. One reason for this is that such activities can lead to the involuntary removal of or-
gans. However, trade in organs is not by definition involuntary, whereas the use of coercion 
is a necessary element to fulfil the statutory description of THB, at least vis-à-vis adults. Arti-
cle 273f Dutch Criminal Code criminalizes the (intended) violation of another person’s 
physical integrity by way of coerced organ removal.24 
Or, to put it another way, trade in organs presumes that there is an organ available for bar-
ter. This organ may be obtained in one of two ways; either voluntarily, whether free of 

                                                                      
23 The legislation came into effect on 1 May 2007, information from the Chinese Embassy in the Netherlands 

dated 17 April 2007. 
24 Profit motive is not an essential element of THB with a view to organ removal. It is, however, likely that most 

criminals who are guilty of the offence will be acting from profit motives. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 198

charge or for payment, or involuntarily, i.e. as a result of THB. Trade in organs is not there-
fore the same thing as THB with a view to organ removal. Inherent only to the latter is the 
use of coercion in the transportation or accommodation of another person for the purpose 
of organ removal. 

Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code applies to Dutch nationals abroad, for example when they 
recruit someone there with deception in order to remove his organs, provided that the ac-
tivities also constitute a criminal offence in the country where they are committed. This re-
quirement of double criminality does not apply if a Dutch national is guilty of THB involv-
ing a minor in a foreign country, including wilfully profiting from the removal of organs 
from a child. 

Minors 
Any person who induces a minor – also without the use of force – to make his organs avail-
able for remuneration will be guilty of THB (Article 273f (1)(5) Dutch Criminal Code).25 Ar-
ticle 273f (1)(2) also describes certain activities relating to non-commercial, voluntary organ 
removal from children. According to the letter of this provision, it seems that innocent 
forms of involvement in organ donation by a child are also criminalized as THB. However, 
according to the spirit of the law this is certainly not the case when the child involved is in a 
position to make a reasonable assessment of his interests, has granted consent and fulfilled 
all other conditions for living organ donation prescribed by the WOD. 

9.3 Exploratory research among medical practitioners 

It is relevant to know whether commercial transplants are taking place to benefit Dutch pa-
tients, or facilitated by Dutch nationals, before investigating whether this might involve 
THB with a view to organ removal. For this reason, in-depth interviews were conducted 
with internist-nephrologists (kidney specialists), transplant coordinators26 and a transplant 
surgeon working at the academic transplant centres. A doctor at the ANWB emergency cen-
tre and two kidney patients were also interviewed. 
It appears from the 14 interviews that there is little or no trade in organs in the Netherlands. 
Nonetheless, many of the interviewees felt that greater watchfulness in this respect is neces-
sary as the number of living donations is on the increase. The relationship or emotional 
bond between the donor and recipient is verified by the nephrologist, the social worker and 
the transplant coordinator and, if necessary, also by a general practitioner, psychologist or 
psychiatrist. At the same time, the interviews show that a donation can proceed if the donor 

                                                                      
25 The THB provision also serves to cover implementation of the position determined under the Optional 

Protocol on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography, annexed to the Convention on the 
Rights of the Child. These obligations include penalising the offer, supply or acceptance of a child for the 
transfer of organs with a view to profit. 

26 The coordinators are responsible for the care of organ donors and their relatives before, during and after the 
donation. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS FOR THE PURPOSE OF ORGAN REMOVAL 

 199 

and the recipient confirm that the donation is completely altruistic and there are no indica-
tions of coercion, financial consideration or, of course, any medical obstacles. The fact that 
the relationship and motives of the donor and recipient are not always thoroughly scruti-
nized means that there is a risk of donation with a view to profit or as a result of force or 
manipulation. Doctors and transplant coordinators seem to be more on the alert for signs of 
pressure or manipulation than a possible profit motive. In some cases, a donor indicated that 
he felt pressurised into donating a kidney to a relative. Some doctors also mentioned cases 
where they suspected that the donor was receiving some financial remuneration. In a few of 
these cases, the donation procedure was cancelled for these reasons. 
At every one of the academic hospitals, it occurs fairly regularly that foreign relatives of kid-
ney patients (mostly of foreign heritage) come to the Netherlands in order to donate a kid-
ney. This is a time-consuming procedure, according to the interviewees. 
All the nephrologists interviewed know or have heard of patients who have undergone a 
kidney transplant abroad (not through Eurotransplant). These operations took place in the 
USA, India, Pakistan, Iran, Iraq, China and possible also Colombia, Singapore and Thailand. 
The letters or medical files patients bring with them after receiving a transplant abroad form 
one source of information about organ tourism. On a limited number of cases, interviewees 
provided some more information, but never very detailed. Possible explanations for this are 
that the patients involved do not tell their nephrologists much about the transplant, or that 
the doctors themselves are reluctant to discuss the subject (in detail). It may also be that 
some doctors had difficulty remembering the cases because they dated back several years. 
Only rarely, the nephrologists we interviewed pick up on signs that a patient has bought a 
kidney abroad. Since patients will generally be reluctant to talk about this with their special-
ists, it is possible that the involvement in the organ trade remains unnoticed to some extent. 
All the doctors interviewed stated that they had never cooperated with any patients who 
wanted to undergo a commercial transplant abroad, with the exception of one doctor who 
assisted a patient of Iranian origins with his preparations for a commercial transplant in the 
country of his birth, where this is permitted.27  
In the context of this research, BNRM spoke to a male kidney patient of Chinese origins 
who had travelled to China in 2004 in order to receive a kidney transplant there. The patient 
received help for this from his relatives in China. The total amount paid for the kidney and 
the transplant was between €10,000 and €50,000. Apart from the long waiting period in the 
Netherlands, the ease of receiving health care in his own language was another reason for 
this patient to have a paid kidney transplant in China. He was helped out in his preparations 
for the transplant by his dialysis doctor in the Netherlands, with whom he also kept in con-
tact during his stay in China. 

                                                                      
27 For a description of the Iranian model, see Fazel (2004). 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 200 

9.4 Points of attention and bottlenecks 

– There are regular reports in the media about the drawbacks of trade in organs, including 
the looting of organs, in other parts of the world. While some may be based on serious in-
vestigative journalism, it is difficult to verify these news items. 

– There is no reliable information on Dutch patients who arrange for an organ transplant 
abroad. This makes it difficult to assess the risk of Dutch nationals being involved (on the 
demand side) in coerced organ removal in other countries. 

– Long waiting periods for transplants, international discrepancies in legislation and access 
to information about transplant opportunities abroad can form a breeding ground for or-
gan tourism from the Netherlands. 

– Medical specialists indicate that the increasing numbers of organ donations by living do-
nors implies that a greater watchfulness on the part of transplant centres for donations 
which are possibly not entirely voluntary or made for a financial consideration is necessary. 

 



 201 

10 
 Recommendations 

Once again, great efforts have been applied and progress has been made in the fight against 
THB since the appearance of the previous Report. The previous Chapters show, however, 
that there are still a number of shortcomings. This Chapter contains recommendations de-
signed to address and improve these matters. They are formulated concisely and should be 
understood in the context of the previous Chapters, as well as the recommendations made 
in previous Reports. The recommendations are grouped thematically and are not arranged 
in order of priority. 

Legislation 
1. The Netherlands must ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Traf-
ficking in Human Beings as quickly as possible. The Convention states, amongst other mat-
ters, that assistance to a victim may not be made conditional on that victim’s willingness to 
act as a witness in the criminal legal process. This is in line with previous recommendations 
by the NRM (NRM3, recommendation 12), to the effect that reception and assistance should 
not be confined to victims who cooperate in investigation and prosecution, or who are con-
sidering doing so. Speedy ratification is also important in connection with the establishment 
of GRETA, the independent group of experts which is to monitor the implementation of 
the Convention. 

2. It is recommended that the legislator develops a national framework for prostitution pol-
icy, based on the principle that every municipality must set rules in relation to all establish-
ments where commercial sexual transactions are undertaken, or where commercial facilities 
are provided for such transactions to be undertaken with or for a third party. Research is re-
quired into the most appropriate format of legislation for this purpose. 

3. Since the employment agency sector is a risk sector for exploitation, an enquiry should be 
made as to whether the British Gangmaster Licensing Act, in terms of which there is obliga-
tory licensing in the United Kingdom for employment brokers in agriculture and the fishing 
industry, is having any impact on the battle against exploitative practices in the employment 
agency sector, and whether similar legislation should also be introduced in the Netherlands. 

Regulations (B-9 and continued residence) 
4. The B-9 regulation for (possible) victims of trafficking should always be offered as soon as 
there is a slight indication of THB. 

5. In light of the judgment by the Council of State to the effect that the suspected victimhood 
of a foreign national does not preclude placing that individual into aliens’ detention, the 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 202 

regulations in this matter should be amended. After all, the intention behind the reflection 
period under the B-9 regulation is that a possible victim should be allowed to consider in 
peace whether or not to report the criminal offence, and this is not compatible with deten-
tion. 

6. It is recommended to include in the B-9 regulation a provision to the effect that a state-
ment by a victim of THB should be regarded as the equivalent of a report of the criminal of-
fence for the purposes of applying the regulation. 

7. The new rules on continued residence following expiry of the B-9 regulation, contained in 
Chapter B16/7 of the Aliens Act Implementation Guidelines, should apply not only to vic-
tims who have reported the criminal offence but also to victims who have cooperated as 
witnesses in the investigation and prosecution processes. This follows on from the previous 
recommendation. 

8. The grounds for continued residence contained in Chapter B16/7 of the Aliens Act Im-
plementation Guidelines – that the victim has reported the offence for the purpose of a 
criminal case which has led to a conviction – should not be confined to criminal cases that 
result in a conviction for THB. There should also be a presumption in law that repatriation 
involves risks if the victim reports the offence of THB for a criminal case where THB is in-
cluded in the charges and the accused is convicted for another offence related to the THB, 
but not for THB as such. 

9. The grounds for continued residence under Chapter B16/7 of the Aliens Act Implementa-
tion Guidelines must be adjusted so as to express more clearly that, after three years in the B-
9 regulation, the length of time the victim has resided in the Netherlands constitutes the 
humanitarian grounds for approving an application for continued residence. 

10. Regarding applications for continued residence not covered by the new regulations, the 
burden of proof should be placed less on the shoulders of the victim. This implies a more 
far-reaching duty of investigation for the government, with a view to preparing a thorough 
risk assessment. 

Central government policy 
11. The fight against THB demands an inter-departmental approach, with each of the Minis-
tries accepting its responsibility. An active contribution on the part of the Ministry of Social 
Affairs and Employment is particularly important when it comes to THB with a view to ex-
ploitation outside the sex industry. 

12. The criteria for employment and self-employment in the sex industry have to be estab-
lished as soon as possible and then publicised widely. 



RECOMMENDATIONS 

 203 

13. In policymaking regarding illegal migration, labour migration and working conditions 
(the impact of any measures on) THB with the intention of exploitation in other sectors than 
the sex industry should always be taken into account. 

14. The government should consider the possibility for undocumented migrants to report a 
criminal offence to the police, or report abuses in the workplace to the Health and Safety In-
spectorate, without running the risk of aliens’ detention and expulsion. 

Law enforcement in the prostitution sector 
15. All of the parties involved in the administrative enforcement in the sex industry must ac-
cept their responsibilities and must undertake such enforcement jointly. This requires more 
intensive checks by the police on the illegal prostitution sector, and a consistent and visible 
repressive approach to law enforcement within the licensed circuit by the municipalities. 
The capacity required for this needs to be made available. This is the only way to achieve a 
prostitution sector as crime-free as possible. It is also recommended that information on ef-
forts in this area, and the results achieved, should be made available centrally. 

16. It is recommended that every municipality should impose a licensing requirement on es-
cort businesses and make it a condition of granting a licence in the General Municipal Ordi-
nance that escort businesses must have a fixed address (with a fixed telephone number) 
where they keep their day-to-day records, including staffing records. In this context, see also 
recommendation 2. 

17. Research should be undertaken into how to maintain effective supervision over sex busi-
nesses where paid and unpaid sex is taking place, such as couples’ clubs. A set of instruments 
should be developed for this purpose. Experience from the supervision of escorts show that 
supervision is possible even for parts of the sex industry that are hard to check up on. 

18. It is important to adequately investigate whether prostitutes working legally are victims 
of THB. For instance, because prostitutes from (previously) significant countries of origin 
for victims of THB have apparently found a way to work in the sex industry legally, for in-
stance via marriages of convenience or self-employment. 

19. Operators of sex businesses (licensed or otherwise) who employ victims of THB must be 
tackled and dealt with in every way possible. This might involve prosecuting them for em-
ployer’s fraud or tax fraud in addition to THB, for example. This requires the collaboration 
of all the chain partners. 

Prevention 
20. Little is known about the impact of prevention and support projects on the victims of 
loverboys or THB. It is recommended that research should be undertaken in this area, to al-
low for a more evidence-based approach. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 204 

21. More should be done to prevent unaccompanied underage asylum seekers from falling 
victim to THB. This must involve clearer arrangements – in a new or adjusted Protocol for 
Missing AMAs or elsewhere – on the responsibilities of the various chain partners in prevent-
ing AMAs from leaving for unknown destinations, as well as in finding them as quickly as 
possible if they do disappear. These responsibilities then have to be acted on – soon after the 
AMA arrives, or immediately after he or she goes missing. The pilot on secure shelter may 
make a contribution here. 

22. The government must accept its responsibility in relation to former AMAs who have just 
reached the age of adulthood and who are vulnerable to exploitation, by keeping this group 
under supervision and offering them support. 

23. Dealing with perpetrators – both preventatively and repressively - through (local) pro-
jects dealing with the loverboy problem is still in its infancy and requires further develop-
ment input. 

24. The fight against THB with a view of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry 
should incorporate involving potential new partners more actively, including employers and 
their organisations, sectoral organisations and trade unions in the known risk sectors. The 
government must provide them with information on THB and enter into a dialogue with 
them on their potential role in preventing and detecting THB. 

25. Since people are more vulnerable to exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry if 
they are unaware of their rights, more needs to be done to inform those who have a mar-
ginal position on the labour market, and in society, about their basic labour rights. The gov-
ernment has an important part to play here. 

26. It is recommended that the Ministry of Foreign Affairs should adopt a more proactive 
policy in relation to the employment and working conditions foreign diplomats in the Neth-
erlands impose on their migrant domestic workers. These employees should be informed of 
their rights (including labour rights) and should have the opportunity for reporting any 
abuses in their employment situation to the Ministry, which should then refer them if neces-
sary. 

27. Making recommendations on how to encourage organ donation is outside the scope of 
this report. However, a general recommendation is made to encourage organ donation so as 
to reduce the risk of coerced organ removal, as well as other irresponsible methods of meet-
ing the demand for organs. 

28. As a number of doctors also indicated, with regard to living organ donations there needs 
to be greater alertness in relation to the possibilities of involuntary donations and financial 
considerations. 



RECOMMENDATIONS 

 205 

Public awareness and identifying (possible) THB 
29. Public awareness should be extended as regards all forms of THB. There are various 
ways to do this, from broad publicity campaigns to the targeted provision of information. It 
is recommended in this context that all employees of those institutions which might encoun-
ter THB should be given enough information to be able to recognise indications of THB and 
to be alert in this respect. Attention should also be given here to the rights of (possible) vic-
tims and the (initial) assistance provided to them, as well as the reporting of any indications 
of THB. 

30. Minors deserve extra attention as a group at risk of exploitation, particularly those 
amongst them who are especially vulnerable, such as those residing in the Netherlands ille-
gally and those with minor psychological handicaps. It is recommended that organisations 
working with vulnerable children should be involved in identifying and assisting underage 
victims, including helping them to report the criminal offence. It is also recommended that 
standard procedures should be developed and disseminated for the protection of children 
who have no residence permit, guided by the Treaty on the Rights of the Child. 

31. Undocumented migrants form a group at risk of exploitation. The training of officials in-
volved in dealing with illegal residence and fraud in the employment market should system-
atically deal with all forms of THB, in order to improve their attentiveness of the signs of ex-
ploitation. Progress has been made in relation to identifying and supporting possible victims 
of THB in aliens’ detention. It is important to maintain this attentiveness, and not to lose 
sight of the possibility of male victims of THB in aliens’ detention. 

32. It appears that certain foreign nationals who reside in the Netherlands legally – such as 
asylum seekers, migrants with a dependent permit to reside with a partner and au pairs – are 
vulnerable to exploitation. It should be investigated how the government can inform these 
individuals of their legal position, and how they can be given an opportunity to ask questions 
or report any employment abuses. In this context, see also recommendation 25. 

33. As regards exploitation in the sex industry, clients, operators, social workers, neighbours, 
passers-by and others who are on the spot – whether professionally or otherwise – all have 
an ongoing and important responsibility in identifying THB. (Potential) clients must be 
made aware of their responsibility to only purchase sexual services in the regulated sector, 
and even then to remain observant. After all, in this sector as well, abuses cannot be ruled 
out by (administrative) checks alone. The public information campaign ‘Appearances are de-
ceptive’, which has yielded results, should be continued in an adjusted format. In this context, 
see also recommendation 29. 

34. Raising awareness of employers is important in connection with exploitation in other 
sectors than the sex industry. This can be done by providing information to employers in the 
sectors where many migrants provide manual labour, profit margins are small and staffing 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 206 

costs are a significant element of production costs. Private individuals employing someone 
for domestic work should also be informed about the minimum standards under employ-
ment law and about THB with a view to labour exploitation. 

Assistance for victims 
35. It should be investigated to what extent the problems of finding (suitable) accommoda-
tion in shelters or reception facilities for victims of THB could be reduced by measures such 
as a central intake and a category-oriented initial reception. 

36. The facilities for victims of THB require expansion and adjustment because of the 
growth in numbers and changes in the target group. A comparison with Belgium, where 
specialised centres are used for the reception of male and female victims of sexual exploita-
tion and other forms of exploitation, could be instructive in light of the shift in the numerical 
proportions of male and female victims. 

37. Attempts must (continue) to be made to create appropriate and effective alternatives to 
simply locking underage girls up if they have been, or are in danger of being introduced to 
prostitution. 

38. It is important that sound legal support for victims of THB is safeguarded in all relevant 
areas of the law – migration law, criminal law and possibly also labour law. 

39. Victims should be informed at the earliest possible stage of the possibility of obtaining 
legal aid. For victims residing in the Netherlands illegally, this should be done at the same 
moment they should be offered the period for reflection under the B-9 regulation. 

40. More should be done to ensure that victims (can) recover their tangible and intangible 
losses by way of compensation. 

Investigation 
41. Police capacity for the investigation of THB must be extended. Police forces should al-
ways and without delay investigate indications of THB. An investigation should be initiated 
for every person suspected of THB who comes to the attention of the police, whether or not 
a victim has reported the criminal offence (for example by collecting and aggregating infor-
mation about the suspects). 

42. Greater attention needs to be paid in the battle against THB to facilitators such as docu-
ment forgers, financial and legal advisers, malafide employment agencies and labour bro-
kers.  

43. Detecting victims of THB is not easy, certainly if they do no want to be recognised as 
such. However, police officers (also from the perspective of their supervising role in the 



RECOMMENDATIONS 

 207 

prostitution sector) have indicated that if they invest time in possible victims – build a bond 
of trust with them and provide sound information – some of them are prepared to come 
forward and even report the criminal offences after all. It is important for all divisions of the 
police force (including the Aliens’ Police) to do this and to thereby give attention to proper 
support, adequate accommodation and the provision of accurate information. The same 
considerations apply outside the sex industry. Individuals who are arrested in connection 
with working illegally must always be interviewed, with attention being paid to any indica-
tions of THB. The manuals used by the (special) investigation agencies for their operations 
against illegal residence and labour market fraud should always refer to the possible pres-
ence of trafficking victims, so that these can be recognised at an early stage and informed 
about their rights. 

44. It is crucial that those police officers who in practice are (likely to be) the first point of 
contact for possible victims of THB who wish to report the offence are also aware of the fact 
that reports regarding THB must always be recorded. 

45. The police must immediately inform the Public Prosecution Service of any report of 
THB. 

46. While human dignity is always at issue in cases of THB, practical experience in investiga-
tion and prosecution has shown that the strict ban on tolerating the continuation of THB 
during investigations requires differentiation for each specific case. The police and the Pub-
lic Prosecution Service look for ways of achieving this differentiation in practice without any 
rules to guide them. The ban on tolerating THB also sometimes obstructs an adequate fi-
nancial investigation. Therefore the recommendation for a critical examination of how the 
policy regarding this ban is being applied in practice is repeated here. 

47. Financial investigation should form part of every THB case from the start, aimed at both 
the confiscation of illegally obtained profits and the provision of evidence. Financial investi-
gation can also prove useful in tracing large-scale (foreign) criminal THB organisations, fa-
cilitators and contacts in the legitimate business world. 

48. Which method of calculating the amount of illegally obtained profits (either on a trans-
actional basis or by cash position/asset comparison) will provide the best chance of confisca-
tion should be considered carefully on a case-by-case basis. 

49. Cash flows destined for foreign countries should be followed where possible. The 
BNRM research has also shown the possibilities for good cooperation with foreign partners 
and acquiring useful information. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 208 

Prosecution 
50. The fight against THB as a policy priority within the Public Prosecution Service must be 
made concrete and realised in practice. 

51. It must be ensured that the Public Prosecution Service policy proposals – such as invest-
ing in investigation and prosecution of all of the partners in crime, financial investigations, 
confiscation and international cooperation – do not end up being pressurized by perform-
ance contracts affecting the police and the Public Prosecution Service. 

52. Some of the Public Prosecution Service policy proposals are expected to result in larger 
numbers of investigations and prosecutions for THB. This must be taken into account as re-
gards capacity within the investigative bodies, the Public Prosecution Service and the judiciary. 

53. Those public prosecutors holding THB portfolios should be involved (to a greater ex-
tent) in the investigation and prosecution of individual THB cases. 

54. If asked to do so, the Public Prosecution Service must always keep victims informed 
about the progress of ‘their’ cases. 

55. It is recommended that relevant (official) reports and background information on the na-
ture and gravity of the offence should be included in a THB case dossier for the court’s in-
formation. 

Sentencing 
56. Greater attention should be paid to developing knowledge and expertise in the field of 
THB among the judiciary. 

57. Consideration should be given to whether THB should become a specialism for the judi-
ciary. 

International cooperation 
58. It is recommended that the Dutch government persists in its efforts to ensure that THB 
remains on the agenda at the European level, where the work in relation to THB should 
(more often) build on what has already been achieved in this field. 

59. In order to ensure a greater impact from the many international conferences on THB, it 
is recommended that the meetings should as far as possible result in concrete agreements, 
which should then be implemented. 

60. In order to prevent THB, to promote joint action on investigation and prosecution and 
possibly repatriation of victims (in a responsible manner), it is important for a range of or-
ganisations to seek or continue an active – coordinated – cooperation in these areas with the 



RECOMMENDATIONS 

 209 

prevalent countries of origin for victims (Bulgaria, Nigeria and Romania), as well as remain-
ing alert for countries of origin from which the number of victims appears to be increasing. 

Registration and (scientific) research 
61. Enquiries must be made as to how to make the registration of clients at the STV less am-
biguous and the records more complete. Every possible measure for improving the situation 
should be taken (adjustments to the registration process and possibly more manpower). 

62. Every institution that does or might have to deal with victims and indications of THB 
must be encouraged to report the circumstances to the appropriate body. The appropriate 
body is the STV as regards support and victim registration. 

63. As far as registration of juvenile prostitution is concerned, it is of crucial importance to 
distinguish between those who might be and those who actually are working in prostitution, 
between minors and young adults and between cases that do and do not involve a third party 
who is inducing or deriving a profit from the activities, as well as recording per individual as 
much as possible. 

64. Research is required into how to distinguish between sexual exploitation and other 
forms of exploitation in the databases containing information on THB (and the fight against 
it), such as Public Prosecution Service data and records from the Immigration and Naturali-
sation Service for B-9 applications. 

65. It is recommended that a study should be made of verdicts in THB confiscation cases, to 
find out why claims are awarded (or not), which factors are at play and the nature of any bot-
tlenecks. The results should then form the basis for finding solutions designed to improve 
confiscation in THB cases. 

66. It is recommended that research should be carried out into cases of victims who – for the 
benefit of those who are exploiting them – take out loans or who get into debt in some other 
way. 

Many of the recommendations from the previous Reports of the NRM have found their 
way into the National Action Plan on Trafficking in Human Beings (NAM) and the Additional 
Measures to the NAM. It would seem likely that the above recommendations will lead to new 
additions to the NAM. However, it will be clear to the reader that a significant proportion of 
the recommendations deal with putting into practice what has already been set down in 
black and white concerning the fight against THB. A high-level THB Taskforce, on which all 
of the chain partners are represented, could play an important stimulating and facilitating 
role for this purpose. The final recommendation is therefore the creation of such a Task-
force. 
 





 211 

11 
 Summary 

11.1 Introduction 

The entry into force of the new Criminal Code provision relating to trafficking in human 
beings (THB) was an important recent development, which brought exploitation in sectors 
other than the sex industry within the scope of the criminal provisions, as well as certain ac-
tivities aimed at organ removal. Three topics were subjected to further research for this re-
port: financial investigations, exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and THB for 
organ removal purposes. 

It is generally recognised that knowledge about THB is of great importance in enabling us to 
deal with the phenomenon in an adequate manner, but also that it is difficult to collect reli-
able information. Another significant question is the type of research that is required. There 
is a great need for numbers and a better understanding of them. There has not however, up 
to the present time, been a great deal of success in estimating the populations of the victims 
of THB. This is regrettable, but – to put matters in context – although knowing the numbers 
may well say something about the scale of the measures needed to be able to deal with THB, 
this would not clarify what has to be done. For this, we (also) need more in the way of quali-
tative information. 

The quantitative information in this report relates to the period up to and including 2005, 
while the qualitative information also covers 2006. 

11.2 Legislation and regulations 

11.2.1 Human trafficking in the Dutch Criminal Code  

The new THB provision (article 273f Dutch Criminal Code entered into force on 1 January 
2005. The new article is included under the title ‘Offences against personal freedom’. The 
new provision is partly based on a range of international agreements and signifies a distinct 
expansion of the conduct that is criminalised as THB: in addition to sexual exploitation, 
other forms of exploitation in the area of employment and services and the forced removal 
of organs are also criminalised, as is wilfully profiting from this type of exploitation and 
forcing or inducing to provide with the proceeds from sex work or organ removal. 
Sentences for aggravated THB have been increased. The penalty for THB without aggravat-
ing circumstances remained at a maximum of six years. When compared with crimes of a 
comparable nature and gravity, this sentence could be described as light. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 212 

Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code is a very extensive and complex article. In order to inter-
pret it, one requires not only the Explanatory Memorandum, but also the underlying inter-
national legislation, which classifies THB as a (serious) form of organised crime and a viola-
tion of human rights. 

11.2.2 B-9 regulation 

The B-9 regulation has undergone a number of amendments since the new THB provision 
came into effect. The scheme now also applies to victims and witness-complainants of ex-
ploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. A new facility was also introduced for vic-
tims and witness-complainants, enabling them to start work from the point when they re-
ceive a B-9 residence permit. It also became possible for underage children of victims and 
witness-complainants to obtain a residence permit for the same duration as that of the prin-
cipal applicant. The reflection period was extended to victims of all forms of exploitation. 
The criteria for continued residence after expiry of the B-9 regulation were also amended. If 
information on THB provided by a victim has ultimately resulted in conviction of the sus-
pect in relation to that THB, the Minister will henceforth assume that this intrinsically im-
plies, in law, that returning the victim to his or her country of origin would involve risks. If 
the prosecution does not lead to a conviction but three years have passed between the grant-
ing of the B-9 residence permit and the judgment becoming irrevocable, then the most sig-
nificant humanitarian factor to be considered by the Minister will be the length of the vic-
tim's residence. Applications for continued residence that are not subject to these criteria 
will be dealt with in accordance with the former policy. 
The moment at which the B-9 is offered remains an obstinate bottleneck. The police ought 
to inform the foreign national about the possibility of reporting the offence of THB, as well 
as about the B-9 regulation, as soon as there is the slightest indication of THB, but this does 
not always happen in practice. And while the purpose behind the period for reflection is that 
a possible victim should be able to consider whether or not to report the crime ‘in complete 
peace’, victims do end up in aliens detention during the reflection period. 
A large number of organizations, who are partners in the chain, exchange information on 
bottlenecks in the implementation of the B-9 regulation, on a regular basis, in the STV Plat-
form. 

11.2.3 Other primary and subordinate legislation 

The report also contains information on the state of affairs in relation to other relevant pri-
mary and subordinate legislation. Attention is devoted, amongst other matters, to the Aliens 
Employment Act [Wet arbeid vreemdelingen], Act on Prevention of Marriages of Conven-
ience [Wet voorkoming schijnhuwelijken], Act on Review of Maximum Penalties [Wet heri-
jking strafmaxima], Act on Strengthening the Position of Victims in Criminal Proceedings 
[Wet versterking positie slachtoffers in het strafproces], Bill on Secure Juvenile Care [Wets-



SUMMARY 

 213 

voorstel gesloten jeugdzorg], and the Act on Minimum Wage and Minimum Holiday Al-
lowance [Wet minimumloon en minimumvakantietoeslag]. 

11.2.4 International developments 

Once again, a number of agreements and regulations have been drawn up among interna-
tional organisations, such as the UN, EU, Council of Europe and OSCE, in an attempt to 
counter THB. The following sections deal with the most relevant of these to policy in the 
Netherlands. 

EU Communication on fighting trafficking in human beings and EU Action Plan 
In October 2005, the European Commission produced the Communication on fighting traf-
ficking in human beings – an integrated approach and proposals for an action plan. The Commu-
nication covers a number of actions to be undertaken by the EU and/or the member states. 
The underlying principle is that THB can only be challenged with an integrated approach 
based on respect for human rights, and in viewing THB as a worldwide problem.  
In December 2005, the Council produced the EU Plan on best practices, standards and pro-
cedures for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings (hereafter the‘THB Ac-
tion Plan’). The Action Plan consists of an overview of actions in the area of coordinating 
EU efforts, mapping the problem, prevention, repressing demand, investigation and prosecu-
tion, protection of and assistance for victims, repatriation and reintegration, and external re-
lations. Its goal is to increase the involvement of the EU and its member states in prevention 
of and challenge to all forms of THB, as well to increase the attention for the protection, as-
sistance and rehabilitation of victims.  

The Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings/ 
The Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings, which 
opened for signature in May 2005, applies to all forms of THB, either national or cross-
border, and whether or not associated with organised crime. The human rights approach is 
an important angle of attack for the Convention, with the aim of preventing and countering 
THB, protecting the rights of victims, arranging for effective investigation and prosecution, 
and finally promoting international collaboration to challenge THB. The Convention con-
tains obligations which go further than other international instruments in this area, and it 
provides for the setting up of a group of independent experts (GRETA) to monitor the en-
forcement of the Convention 

European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) 
In 2005, for the first time in its existence, the ECHR established a violation of article 4 of the 
European Convention on Human Rights, which sets out the prohibition against slavery, 
servitude and forced or compulsory labour. In the case of Siliadin v. France (ECHR, 26 July 
2005) the Court held that French criminal law offered inadequate protection to a girl from 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 214 

Togo, working in a French household in very poor circumstances, against the servitude to 
which she was subjected by a private individual. 

11.3 Administrative enforcement in the sex industry 

11.3.1 Developments in the sex industry 

The number of licensed sex businesses is declining. (New) companies where sexual services 
are on offer (sometimes covertly and sometimes licensed) include Turkish coffee houses, 
Chinese and Thai massage salons, (gay) saunas, couples’ clubs, (Chinese) barber shops, nail 
studios and tanning studios. Sex businesses are set up in some areas along the lines of the 
German ‘FKK’ model, recreational houses where arrangements can also be made with pros-
titutes working independently. A ‘hustle circuit’ has also come into existence, and Internet 
prostitution appears to be on the increase. Streetwalkers’ zones were closed in a number of 
municipalities, while in others they were either maintained or opened up. 
No increase has been established in the number of prostitutes or victims of THB from the 
countries in Central and Eastern Europe who joined the EU in 2004. Because the situation is 
comparable for prostitutes from Romania and Bulgaria, who joined the EU on 1 January 
2007, the expectation is that in these cases, as well, the new situation will not lead to an in-
crease in (coerced) prostitution from those countries. Nor is there expected to be any impact 
on the number of prostitutes from the new EU member states as a result of the termination 
of the temporary restriction on the free movement of workers. Operators of sex businesses 
have not hitherto taken on any salaried employees, but rather prefer to look for structures in 
terms of which the prostitutes are independent entrepreneurs – and residents from the new 
member states are already permitted to work as independent entrepreneurs in the Nether-
lands. 

11.3.2 Preventive enforcement 

In the regulation of the prostitution industry, preventive enforcement includes the granting 
of licences. So far as we are aware, all of the municipalities which have adopted a prostitu-
tion policy impose, as a condition of granting a licence, a prohibition against putting minors 
or undocumented prostitutes or victims of THB to work. These municipalities have actually 
made a range of choices in relation to the forms of prostitution covered by the licensing sys-
tem. Virtually all of the municipalities have included brothels and window prostitution in the 
licensing system. This does not apply in relation to escort companies, home workers or 
prostitution on the street. 
The Public Administration Probity Screening Act [Wet BIBOB] is of significance if licences 
are granted to (prospective) operators in the prostitution industry. This Act provides for the 
option of refusing to grant a licence, or an extension of a licence, if there is any danger that it 



SUMMARY 

 215 

is also likely to be used for the commission of criminal offences or the enjoyment of the pro-
ceeds of such offences. 

11.3.3 Administrative supervision 

Checking (including administrative checks) on compliance with licence conditions for run-
ning a sex business is undertaken by the police in most municipalities in the Netherlands. 
Supervision of licensed site-specific sex businesses (for example licensed clubs and window 
brothels) is, relatively speaking, the most straightforward and also the most systematic. But 
the checks still leave something to be desired. Abuses are still being discovered on the li-
censed circuit, even though it is not clear how often, because neither the police nor the mu-
nicipal authorities have hitherto published any (national) data on this. 
Mechanisms have been developed for checking on sex businesses that are not site-specific 
(for example escort bureaus), such as a protocol for ‘supervision by arrangement’, also de-
scribed as the ‘hotel procedure’. The disadvantage of this procedure is the capacity it takes 
up. Consideration is being given in Amsterdam not only to bringing escort companies 
within the ambit of the licensing system, but also to specifying, as a condition of the licence, 
that escort companies should have a fixed address where they maintain their (staffing) re-
cords on a day-to-day basis. 
Checks on the unlicensed (illegal) sex industry, in those places where licences are obligatory, 
occur to a significantly lesser extent than checks on the licensed sex industry. In addition, the 
checks are not always easy to carry out, certainly where (publicly accessible) facilities are in-
volved where paid and unpaid sex can take place (for example couples’ clubs and dating ca-
fes). The fact that there is less (possible) supervision over this sector of the sex industry 
means that it becomes a place of concealment for THB. 
The responsibility for the planning and implementation of enforcement must be fully in the 
hands of the local administrative authorities. The deployment of the police has to be com-
plementary to this. The police have a larger part to play with respect to unlicensed busi-
nesses, but even here the initiative has to remain with the municipal authorities. This initia-
tive is lacking in many municipalities. 

11.3.4 Repressive administrative enforcement 

In order to ensure an integrated approach, it is necessary that mutual information be passed 
between the municipal authorities and the police on matters of potential mutual signifi-
cance. If the police come across relevant information in the context of administrative super-
vision or criminal investigation, they should draw this to the municipality's attention by 
means of an administrative report. After all, administrative intervention is only possible if 
the municipal authorities have the relevant information. Sanctions must be imposed if li-
cence holders for sex companies do not observe the conditions. These may vary from a 
warning, via a restriction of opening hours or imposition of an administrative penalty up to 
temporary or permanent closure and revocation of the licence. There are still some munici-



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 216 

palities whose administrators are not addressing abuses and who do not respond to admin-
istrative reports. 

11.3.5 A more sharply focussed statutory framework 

Decentralised prostitution policy, which was opted for when the general ban on brothels 
was lifted, has resulted in local differences as regards the substance of licence conditions and 
also in relation to the scope of the General Municipal Ordinance [Algemene Plaatselijk 
Verordening]. The differences between the various municipal licence systems result in un-
equal facilities for supervision and enforcement, from which malafide operators, as well as 
human traffickers, can profit. As far as administrative enforcement in relation to dealing 
with THB in the prostitution industry is concerned, the significance of a more ‘solid’ statu-
tory framework for municipal prostitution policy lies in the fact that it would no be longer 
be possible for dishonest operators to set up their operations in places where they have no - 
or less stringent - licensing conditions and administrative controls to deal with. Municipal 
authorities should therefore be obligated to regulate certain matters in their local prostitu-
tion policy, which at the moment is only optional. 

11.4 Victims 

11.4.1 Specific (risk) groups 

The report discusses several groups of (possible) victims. First of all, minors. Exploitation of 
minors has been known to occur in the Netherlands. Some important factors that render 
minors (particularly) vulnerable include emotional dependency, lack of documents, family 
circumstances and financial reasons. 
One vulnerable group receiving attention is made up of (former) AMAs (unaccompanied 
underage asylum seekers. AMAs continue to disappear for unknown destinations, and 
(former) AMAs whose living allowances end on their 18th birthdays often do not return to 
their countries of origin but end up involved as an illegal resident, with all the concomitant 
risks including the possibility of exploitation. 
Asylum seekers in general also form one of the vulnerable groups. 

11.4.2 Victims ‘in numbers’ 

Victims in STV records 
One of the tasks of STV is to record (suspected) victims of THB. The recorded numbers 
have grown, following a dip in 2003; 403 victims were recorded in 2004 and 424 in 2005. 
Provisional data indicates that the growth continued during 2006. As in previous years, the 
largest number of reports come from the police. In 2004 and 2005, the Netherlands was the 
most frequent country of origin for victims of THB. Bulgaria takes second place, with Nige-



SUMMARY 

 217 

ria and Romania intermittently holding third and fourth places. The number and percentage 
of Dutch victims increased steeply in 2004 and 2005. As in previous years, most of the vic-
tims were in the age bracket from 18 to 30. The victims included three men during those two 
years. 
Unfortunately, the computerised STV record system still has insufficient detailed back-
ground information on many of the victims. 

Victims in IND records 
In 2005, the IND received 77 B-9 applications and issued 61 B-9 permits. The figures for 
2006 were 180 applications and 150 permits. The applicants included seven minors, two of 
whom were almost certainly the children of victims. Nearly all B-9 applicants in 2005 were 
female, with only three men among them. 
In 2005, one in six of the victims/witnesses of THB who applied for or were granted a B-9 
residence permit were Bulgarian nationals. This means that – just as in 2002 and earlier years 
– Bulgaria topped the list of countries of origin of victims and witnesses with a B-9 permit. 
Sierra Leone was in second place in 2005. If allocated according to region of origin, it ap-
pears that the majority of the victims and witnesses who applied for or were awarded a B-9 
residence permit came from countries that had joined the EU in 2004 and 2007, (Western) 
Africa, and non-EU countries in Eastern Europe. 
In 2006, the IND contact officials for THB recorded 34 applications for continued residence, 
with equal numbers being approved and rejected (17 and 17) at first instance. 

11.5 Assistance 

11.5.1 System-oriented operation 

Many parties are involved in combating THB. System-wide collaboration among the part-
ners in the chain is gaining ground both as regards repression of THB and also in relation to 
assistance for victims. 

11.5.2 Victim reception 

The increasing numbers of applications for reception have made it difficult to find (suitable) 
reception places with accommodation for victims of THB. There is not much experience yet 
with victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry, and there are few recep-
tion places available for male victims. 
Opinion is divided on the question of whether assisting victims of THB requires specific ex-
pertise and reception specific to the category. One option being considered at the moment is 
a (category-specific) reception path before victims enjoy the rights of the B-9 regulation, 
where it could be established what sort of care and assistance was required by the victim, as 
well as what type of reception. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 218 

Minors who are victims of loverboys, as well as girls who are under threat of being drawn 
into prostitution, are actually placed in judicial juvenile institutions for their own protection. 
While it is important to detach these girls from the loverboys, locking them up does not sit 
easily with the child's interests, certainly if the treatment is delayed, perhaps even for some 
time. 

11.5.3 Dealing with juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem 

Juvenile prostitution is not the same thing as THB, but developments in this area are un-
doubtedly relevant in the context of this report. After all, if someone introduces a minor to 
prostitution, this can certainly be considered a case of THB. The situation here is that it is not 
always immediately possible to detect the potential involvement of a pimp or human traf-
ficker. 
Since 2003, local, regional and national institutions have been exchanging information sev-
eral times each year concerning recent developments in the area of juvenile prostitution, in 
the National Juvenile Prostitution Platform [Landelijk Platform Jeugdprostitutie]. The Juvenile 
Prostitution Information Centre [Informatiepunt Jeugdprostitutie], which operates as a na-
tional source of information, set up the meetings for this Platform in 2005, with a view to 
collating ‘good practices’ in the field of combating juvenile prostitution. Its follow-up is the 
Juvenile Prostitution Expertise Centre [Expertisepunt Jeugdprostitutie]. 
Various municipalities have juvenile prostitution projects and strategies (or plans for them) 
to address the loverboy problem. Generally speaking these include a combination of a re-
porting point and arrangements for an integrated and systematic approach, with the aim of 
preventing minors from becoming involved in prostitution, preventing boys from becom-
ing loverboys, providing adequate reception, shelter and assistance for victims, and investi-
gating and prosecuting suspects. In addition to the municipal authorities, the participating 
organisations usually include Juvenile Care Bureaus, the police, the Public Prosecution Ser-
vice (PPS), the Child Protection Agency and local projects including those for the reception 
of victims. Work is currently underway on a national register for juvenile prostitution. This 
will cover minors and young adults (up to the age of 24) who have ended up - or run the risk 
of ending up - in prostitution. 

11.5.4 Some assistance organisations 

STV [Dutch Foundation against Trafficking in Women] plays an important part in many of 
the developments and initiatives in the area of helping and supporting victims of THB. For 
instance, STV promotes a system-oriented approach, is setting up the recording of juvenile 
prostitution, for reception facilities it has sounded out views on the desirability of category-
based reception and, in conjunction with a range of chain partners, it has developed a Check-
list for Continued Residence in Human Trafficking Cases which may have a part to play when an 
application for continued residence is lodged on humanitarian grounds. 



SUMMARY 

 219 

BLinN [Bonded Labour in the Netherlands] has recently set up buddy projects, assisted with 
victim support groups and developed a range of training programs for victims. BLinN can 
also provide a mediation service for finding courses, training or (voluntary) work, and it also 
has an emergency fund for victims of THB. BLinN has issued pamphlets with information 
for victims. 
IOM [International Organisation for Migration] offers support to victims of THB who wish 
to return to their country of origin, sometimes making use of native counsellors. 
More than 100 individuals in the La Strada partner nations, now numbering nine countries, 
are actively involved in prevention, information, education and support for victims. 
IOM, BLinN, and La Strada, along with SRTV and STV, have concluded an accord in rela-
tion to assistance and support for victims returning to their country of origin.  
The Scharlaken Koord [Scarlet Cord] is involved in street work, prevention, information and 
social assistance in connection with prostitution, and has a Get Out Programme for women 
who wish to stop their involvement in prostitution. 
ECPAT [End Child Prostitution, Child Pornography and the Trafficking of Children for 
Sexual Purposes] campaigns against the commercial (sexual) exploitation of children, un-
dertakes research and has developed a multidisciplinary training programme for profes-
sionals working with children who are victims of trafficking for sexual purposes and chil-
dren who run an increased risk of becoming such victims. 
The reception project of the Refugee Council [Stichting Vluchtelingenwerk ] in Utrecht offers 
assistance to former AMAs who are trying to decide about their future. SAMAH [Founda-
tion for Unaccompanied Underage Asylum Seekers, Humanitas] has developed the project 
Beyond Borders for AMAs and former AMAs, offering youngsters the possibility of return-
ing home voluntarily and with prospects. 

11.6 Investigation and prosecution 

11.6.1 (Policy) developments in investigation and prosecution 

National 
A new Human Trafficking Guideline appeared in 2006, also covering exploitation in sectors 
other than the sex industry. Human trafficking was also named by the Ministers of Justice 
and Internal Affairs and Kingdom Relations and the Board of Procurators General as one of 
the six priorities in the campaign against organised crime. Performance indicators are also to 
be designated in the field of THB. Increased qualifications will also be imposed on THB 
prosecutors and their support staff. The National Public Prosecutor for human trafficking 
and people smuggling (LOvJ) coordinates the campaign against (international) organised 
THB from the National Public Prosecutor’s Office. For this purpose, the LOvJ directs the 
National Crime Squad [Nationale Recherche] and maintains close contact with its subsidiary 
EMM [Expertise Centre on Human Trafficking and Smuggling] which collates, organises 
and provides information on (signs of) THB for tactical and strategic purposes. The Dutch 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 220 

Royal Military Constabulary, SIOD [Social Information and Investigation Service] and the 
IND are also represented in EMM. For some years now, the police have had a National 
Human Trafficking Expert Group, one of whose purposes is to aim for uniformity and co-
hesion in the Dutch police campaign against THB. Police districts also exchange operational 
information on THB in the Human Trafficking Operational Consultation Group, which meets 
every two months. 

International 
Both the police and the PPS are involved in international cooperation to combat cross-
border crime. Police forces in the border regions of the Netherlands have long collaborated 
with their colleagues in the neighbouring countries of Germany, Belgium and Luxembourg. 
In one of these collaborative arrangements, human trafficking is the main priority. 

11.6.2 Indications of human trafficking 

Various organisations who can encounter THB in the context of inspection and enforce-
ment are mentioned in the Human Trafficking Guideline. Apart from the police, the Royal 
Military Constabulary and the municipal authorities, these would include for example the 
Health & Safety Inspectorate [Arbeidsinspectie (AI)], the Social Information and Investiga-
tion Service [Sociale Inlichtingen en Opsporingsdienst (SIOD)] and the Fiscal Information 
and Investigation Service/Economic Audit Service [Fiscale Inlichtingen- en Opsporingsdi-
enst/Economische Controledienst (FIOD/ECD)]. In recent years, the police have deployed a 
range of activities designed to improve on their collecting and recording of signs of THB, 
such as the (further) development of a THB checklist, which also covers the detection of ex-
ploitation in other sectors than the sex industry and coerced organ removal. In addition, in 
order to increase the knowledge of THB among all police officers, a leaflet on THB has been 
developed, and work is going on to improve the information position of Criminal Intelli-
gence Units with regard to THB. This sort of activity is important, because THB is not al-
ways recognised as such by police officers and signs of THB are not always recorded as such 
in police systems. On the one hand, this is due to the fact that victims of THB do not always 
want to be recognised as such. On the other hand, victims who do wish to escape free from 
their situation are not always found, recognised or helped by the police or the Aliens Police. 
Victims are not always given the opportunity to report the crime, they are offered little or no 
time for reflection and the police process official reports themselves without consulting the 
PPS. It is worth mentioning that the National Ombudsman has established that police offi-
cers are obliged in principle to record any report of a criminal offence. 

During investigations by the SIOD, multiple dependency on the employer, which is a sign of 
exploitation, is regularly discovered. The Labour Market Fraud Teams of the AI are in a 
good position to pick up indications of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. 
IND employees may also be in a position to identify THB, for example in asylum proceed-



SUMMARY 

 221 

ings. The IND does not (yet) have an internal instruction on this. All of these bodies are sup-
posed to pass any signs of THB to EMM, but this procedure needs to be improved. 
Assistance organisations and interest groups can also spot (possible) THB. Some non-
governmental organisations report indications of possible THB to the police (anony-
mously). But because they are primarily interested in the interest of individual clients, they 
are not always inclined to inform the police or the AI, for example, about exploitation situa-
tions. 
Ordinary citizens can also pick up indications of THB. It is important that the public is able 
to recognise THB and knows what to do with the information. This is why, at the start of 
2006, Crimestoppers [Stichting Meld Misdaad Anoniem] started the campaign ‘Appearances 
are deceptive’ [‘Schijn bedriegt’] in some regions, aimed at the prostitution sector. The cam-
paign has produced useful reports of THB. 

11.6.3 Investigation 

Not every case with a clue for criminal investigation is taken up. Cases are passed on (some-
times for a lengthy period) either internally, to other regional police forces or to the National 
Crime Squad, without any action being taken in the meantime. However, other police forces 
and the National Crime Squad are generally reluctant to take up such cases. This results in 
stagnation, case backlogs and in some cases dismissal (by the police). Potentially large inves-
tigations are also curtailed, more often than is desirable, into ‘quick hit’ cases. Capacity avail-
able for THB is under pressure because of performance contracts. 
There are, however, regional police forces which do invest a great deal in the fight against 
THB. In these forces, it has been agreed, for example, that any sign of THB will always lead 
to the start of a police investigation even if no one has reported the crime (yet). This can be 
done by aggregating information. 
In addition – in the context of the programmatic approach to organised crime – there is the 
THB investigation ‘Sneep’ in terms of which various authorities such as (regional) police 
forces, the Royal Military Constabulary, SIOD and IND, Customs and municipalities col-
laborate using the ‘barrier model’. The programmatic approach is aimed at combating crime 
not only from the perspective of criminal law. This means that those involved in this case are 
also proceeded against via administrative law. Financial investigations also take place, in-
cluding the investigation of ‘facilitators’.  
The detection of THB aimed at exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry is still in its 
infancy. Various regional police forces, however, are investigating cases of non-sexual ex-
ploitation. The SIOD has also started investigations into THB for the purpose of labour ex-
ploitation. In 2006, one investigation into this type of THB resulted in prosecution and a 
judgment (acquittal) at first instance. 

The police successfully completed 60 THB investigations in 2004, a higher number than in 
previous years. The number of investigations into domestic THB, in particular, increased 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 222 

sharply in 2004. The 60 investigations brought to light 34 minors, 24 of whom submitted an 
official report to the police. In three of the investigations, the victims were forced not only to 
do sex work but also to conclude loans or take on debts for the suspects. At least 184 reports 
of THB were submitted to the police in 2005. 

11.6.4 Financial investigations 

The Human Trafficking Guideline stated that financial investigation should be a standard 
element of investigations into THB. BNRM researched the financial investigations in the 
THB cases that were successfully completed in 2004. In many of the cases studied, financial 
investigation appeared to be a standard element, and confiscation of illegally obtained prof-
its seemed to be a strong motivator. By contrast, financial investigation was bypassed if it 
appeared that the suspect had few assets or no illegally obtained profits. Yet, even then it can 
be worthwhile to carry out a financial investigation, for example to gather evidence, but also 
to gain an understanding of the scale of a criminal network, (new) suspects that may be in-
volved, the different legal sectors that might be involved or the operating methods of the 
criminals. 
A range of financial investigation methods were studied more closely. This made clear the 
significant importance of asking financial questions to victims: in three quarters of the inves-
tigations where there was some financial gain and the victims were questioned about this, it 
was possible to estimate the illegally obtained profits partly on the basis of the statements 
made by the victims. The profit can also be calculated on the basis of other information, such 
as tapped telephone conversations. This is important, because many victims do not wish or 
dare to make a statement. And it is through ‘tapping’ that the ban on allowing cases of THB 
to continue makes itself felt: if the taps show that THB is going on, immediate intervention is 
necessary in order to remove the victims from the exploitative situation. Sometimes this is at 
the expense of the (financial) investigation. Searches also often lead to valuable information. 
In nearly three quarters of the investigations where the search focused on financial informa-
tion, financial records (sometimes a ‘shadow’ set of books) were indeed discovered. Check-
ing money transfers takes up a lot of time, and is far less frequently successful in terms of re-
sults. In a quarter of the investigations, indications were found of cash flows going abroad, 
or assets being held abroad. This only resulted in requests for foreign legal assistance in a 
limited number of cases, however, but these had positive results (sometimes against all ex-
pectations). 
Information was exchanged with the Tax Administration in a range of investigations, for ex-
ample with a view to catching a slice of criminal profits by means of a tax surcharge. 
In one of the investigations studied, the police investigated the THB while the SIOD looked 
into the employer fraud. The SIOD investigation also resulted in a confiscation case. Both 
organisations achieved better results by sharing their knowledge and understanding. Also, if 
the suspects were acquitted of THB, they can still be convicted for fraud and suffer a (finan-
cial) penalty. 



SUMMARY 

 223 

The police calculated illegally obtained profits of 19 suspects, with the average amount for 
each suspect being €122,759. The highest amount earned by a suspect according to these cal-
culations was €500,000 and the lowest was €1,000. In 4 (10%) of the 42 THB cases success-
fully completed in 2003 a confiscation claim was presented. 
The interviewees indicated that victims hardly ever see any of the money back that they paid 
to the human traffickers. There are several ways in which victims can lodge a claim for com-
pensation. Victims seldom make use of these options, probably because they are not told 
about them (or not sufficiently and clearly informed about them), or because they receive 
very little in the way of legal assistance, are unwilling to proceed from fear (vengeful perpe-
trators) or are in love (loverboys) or because they do not regard themselves as being a victim. 

11.6.5 Prosecution 

Human trafficking cases registered with the Public Prosecution Service 
220 cases were registered with the PPS in 2004, and 135 in 2005, which (also) involved a sus-
picion of THB. The provisional figures for 2006 show a further increase. Out of these cases, 
15% (2004) and 27% (2005) involved victims who were minors. 
The majority of the cases involved THB in aggravated circumstances. The courts did not 
deal with any cases of exploitation in another sector than the sex industry or organ removal 
in 2005. 
Human trafficking is generally the sole or most serious offence registered. In nearly 20% of 
the cases in 2004 and 2005, there was a more serious crime charged in addition to THB, usu-
ally some form of (sexual) violence. The combination with participation in a criminal or-
ganisation is being charged less frequently. 

Dealing of cases by the Public Prosecution Service and settlement by the courts 
The PPS dealt with 252 cases in 2004 and 146 in 2005. About 70% of these resulted in a 
summons. 
Virtually all of the cases brought before the courts by the PPS ended up with a sentence be-
ing imposed (89% in 2004 and 85% in 2005 of the cases prosecuted) and this involved im-
prisonment in 88% and 91% of the cases respectively. 
288 sentences in relation to THB were issued in the period from 2003 to 2005. In 252 of 
those cases, unconditional imprisonment was imposed with an average sentence of about 25 
months. 
About 39% of the cases in 2004 and 50% of those in 2005 were appealed, most of them 
(jointly or solely) by the accused. 

The accused 
Three quarters of the accused in THB cases, registered with the PPS in 2004 and 2005, were 
between the age of 18 and 41. There were 4 underage suspects in 2004, and the same number 
in 2005. More than 80% were male, with the number of female suspects varying markedly 
according to country of origin. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 224 

Again in 2004 and 2005, the Netherlands was the most common country of birth for the 
suspects, with Turkey and Romania having reasonably stable positions in the top five coun-
tries of origin. There was a marked increase in the incidence of Morocco as the country of 
birth for suspects, with Hungary also coming into this picture and Bulgaria and the former 
Yugoslavia playing a lesser part. 

11.7 Exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 

11.7.1 Definition of terms 
The introduction of the new THB article has not resulted in clear-cut dividing line between 
poor employer conduct and conduct that deemed to be exploitation as defined in Article 
273f, paragraph 2, Dutch Criminal Code. What is clear, though, is that the legal expression 
‘exploitation’ covers extremely poor working conditions, where human rights are at stake. 
This can be due to a single obvious excess or an excess consisting of an accumulation of less 
serious abuses. The indicators that might point towards exploitation include physical vio-
lence against an employee, coerced dangerous work, unreasonable working hours, under-
payment, working to pay off debts and dependence on the employer for, for example, ac-
commodation and documentation. 
In relation to THB, the expressions ‘labour’ and ‘services’ are not confined to formal em-
ployment relationships. Nor is it necessary for the exploiter to be the employer or to be pre-
sent in the workplace. Practices that can border on THB for non-sexual exploitation include 
illegal adoption, rack rent housing and forced marriages. 

11.7.2 The criterion for exploitation used 

BNRM conducted an exploratory study into serious abuse in employment situations. 197 
cases descriptions were collected, dating from 2000 to the start of 2006. 
The criterion for exploitation in the meaning of THB applied in this study was based on the 
combination of, on the one hand, the impossibility to leave the situation, as a constant factor, 
and on the other hand, as variable factors, coercion, bad labour conditions, and multiple de-
pendency. When assessing a particular case, factors such as the duration of the situation, the 
degree of organisation and the age of the victim were also taken into consideration. Apply-
ing this criterion, exploitation as defined in article 273f, Dutch Criminal Code, was found in 
54 (45%) of the 119 case descriptions. The research thus shows that exploitation in other sec-
tors than the sex industry is going on in the Netherlands, but it does not reveal the scale of 
the problem. 

11.7.3 Risk sectors 

Illegal employment is a substantial element of the underbelly of the Dutch economy. In con-
cealed circuits of malafide employment agencies, employees have difficulty protecting 



SUMMARY 

 225 

themselves against abuse, particularly if they are undocumented migrants. It is clear from 
the cases on domestic work and ethnic entrepreneurship that exploitation often occurs in 
hidden employment situations. The collected case descriptions were drawn from 16 sectors. 
The respondents mostly described situations in the temporary employment sector, agricul-
ture and horticulture, the catering industry – with the most significant subcategory being 
Chinese restaurants – and domestic work. As far as domestic work is concerned, three types 
of employer merit special attention: relatives, ‘au pair’ host families and foreign diplomats. 

11.7.4 Characteristics and risk groups 

The new definition of the offence of THB has changed the numerical relationship between 
men and women among the victims and potential victims of THB. This has consequences 
for, among other things, the image of the offence and for how to provide victim assistance. 
A marginal position in the Dutch labour market and/or society may render individuals vul-
nerable to exploitation. Residence permit status, age and psychological disposition have a 
part to play in this respect. 
Many undocumented migrants are unaware of their rights, do not dare to make any claims 
against employers and, as far as possible, avoid contact with the authorities. 
Minors are generally more vulnerable than adults. Clearly, putting a minor to work does not 
necessarily constitute exploitation, but if an employer makes a child do more or harder work 
than permitted, this abuse can (in combination with others) amount to an excess. In cases 
with (possibly) underage victims of exploitation extra care is not yet a standard measure. Il-
legal residence can hamper the attention that is required in terms of identification, reception 
and assistance, also in reporting the crime, of (possibly) exploited children. 

11.7.5 Dealing with exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 

Little is yet known about the characteristics and operating methods of perpetrators of THB 
with a view to exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. It appears that the exploiter 
and the victim often belong to the same ethnic group. Exploitation sometimes occurs within 
relationships and families. 
Efforts to prevent and combat exploitation outside the sex industry are still in the early 
stages. Certainly in this phase it is important that inspectors and detectives who enter the 
shop floor should be alert to any signs of exploitations and should be aware of the fact that 
there may be (possible) victims of THB among undocumented migrant workers. A victim-
oriented approach to THB requires that they should be informed about their rights. 
It is not yet possible to report on how the Dutch courts deal with exploitation outside the sex 
industry. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 226 

11.8 Human trafficking with a view to organ removal 

There are scarcely any indications that THB with a view to organ removal takes place in the 
Netherlands, but the shortage of available organs for transplant purposes may lead to organ 
tourism (travelling abroad for transplants), organ trade (commercial transplants) or THB 
for organ removal. 

11.8.1 Organ donation 

The Organ Donation Act [Wet op de Orgaandonatie (WOD)] sets out the rules for the re-
moval of organs. The most important conditions are permission from the donor (or, on do-
nation after death, from the surviving relatives) and provision of the organ free of charge. In 
the Netherlands, someone who has not indicated that his permission for the removal of or-
gans is not, in principle, available as a donor. The WOD criminalises the removal of organs 
without permission. In certain circumstances this will also amount to THB, which carries 
the threat of a heavier punishment. 

11.8.2 Trade in organs 

Trade in organs includes offering organs for sale, selling and/or purchasing them, and medi-
ating between the seller and purchaser with a view to profit. 
There is an ongoing debate on the desirability of (free) market processes in relation to organ 
transplants. Some argue that commercialising the body renders exploitation inevitable. 
Others do not regard commercialisation as objectionable in principle, and argue for certain 
forms of organ trade to be allowed. The point has to be made that there are economic and 
medical risks associated with the voluntary sale of organs, for instance when no proper af-
tercare is provided. The trade in organs is formally permitted in a few countries. News re-
ports on (illegal) organs trade are difficult to verify. In China, the authorities appear to have 
been involved in organ removal, without permission, from prisoners who were executed. 
Dutch citizens who buy an organ abroad are not deemed guilty of committing a criminal of-
fence under Dutch law, unless coercion has been used. 

11.8.3 Human trafficking with a view to organ removal 

There is a distinction to be drawn between the trade in organs and THB with a view to organ 
removal. The trade in organs is not by definition involuntary, whereas the definition of 
THB, at least when it regards adults, incorporates the use of coercion. Article 273f, Dutch 
Criminal Code, concerns forcibly purchasing, transporting or taking another person with 
the purpose of removing organs. This provision also applies to Dutch citizens who commit 
this offence abroad, provided that it also constitute a crime in the country in question. Who-
ever induces a minor – without or without coercion – to make his or her organs available, for 
remuneration, will be guilty of THB (Article 273f, paragraph 1.5, Dutch Criminal Code). 



SUMMARY 

 227 

11.8.4 Interviews among medical practitioners 

Interviews with kidney specialists, transplant coordinators, a transplant surgeon, a doctor 
with the ANWB and two kidney patients show that there is (virtually) no trade in organs in 
the Netherlands. Still, many of the respondents argued for increased alertness now that the 
number of living donors is on the increase. With living donors, the relationship and motives 
of the donor and recipient are not always investigated thoroughly, so that there can be a risk 
of donation with a view to profit or as a result of coercion or manipulation. 
In all university hospitals in the Netherlands, it has been know to occur that foreign relatives 
of kidney patients (principally those of foreign heritage) come to the Netherlands in order to 
donate a kidney. There is no reliable information on Dutch patients who go abroad to have 
an organ implant, but the kidney specialists who were interviewed were aware of (accounts 
of) patients who had undergone kidney transplants abroad. Only very rarely did they have 
indications that payment was made for a kidney abroad, but these possibly escape them be-
cause patients do not often talk about this with their specialists. With one exception, the doc-
tors indicated that they had never cooperated with a patient who wanted to undergo a paid 
transplant abroad. The exception related to a patient who wanted to have a commercial 
transplant in Iran, his country of origin, where this is permitted. 

11.9 Conclusion: recommendations 

The report contains a large number of recommendations on a range of topics, namely: legis-
lation and regulations, government policy, law enforcement in the sex industry, prevention, 
public awareness, assistance to victims, detection, investigation, prosecution and trials, in-
ternational cooperation and registration and (scientific) research. These can be found in 
Chapter 10. 
 





 229 

Bibliography* 

*This bibliography is an annex to the original Dutch report; not all references thus appear in 
the current English translation. 

Aa, A.van der (concept, z.jr.). Ketenaanpak tegen mensenhandel. Resultaatgericht 
samenwerken voor slachtoffers (en daders) van seksuele en economische uitbuiting. 
Amersfoort: STV. 

Adviescommissie voor Vreemdelingenzaken (2003a). Kinderen en de asielpraktijk. De positie 
van het kind voor, tijdens, en na de asielprocedure - tegen de achtergrond van het internationaal 
recht. Bijlagen behorende het advies. Den Haag: ACVZ. 

Adviescommissie voor Vreemdelingenzaken (2003b). Kinderen en de asielprocedure. De positie 
van het kind voor, tijdens, en na de asielprocedure - tegen de achtergrond van het internationaal 
recht. Den Haag: ACVZ. 

Adviesraad Internationale Vraagstukken (2004). From internal to external borders. 
Recommendations for developing a common EU asylum and migration policy by 2009. Den Haag: 
AIV. 

Aebi, M.F. e.a. (2006). European Sourcebook of Crime and Criminal Justice Statistics - 2006. 
Third edition. Den Haag: Boom Juridische uitgevers. 

Akinbingöl, Ö.F. (2003). Knooppunt Istanbul. Mensensmokkel via Turkije. Amsterdam: 
Meulenhoff. 

Altink, S.M. & Bokelman, S. (2006). Rechten van prostituees…. Amsterdam: De Rode Draad. 

Amnesty International (2004). People's Republic of China - Executed ‘according to law’?  
The death penalty in China. London: Amnesty International. 

Anderson, B. & O'Connell-Davidson, J. (2002). Part II: The demand side of trafficking. A multi 
country pilot study. Z.pl., z.u.. 

Anderson, B. & O'Connell-Davidson, J. (2003). Is trafficking in human beings demand driven? 
A multi-country pilot study. Geneva: IOM. 

Anderson, B. & Rogaly, B. (2005). Forced labour and migration to the UK. London: Trades 
Union Congress.  

Anderson, B. e.a. (2006). Fair enough? Central and East European migrants in low-wage 
employment in the UK. York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 230 

Anti-Slavery International (2006). Sub Regional Project of Eradicating Child Domestic Work 
and Child Trafficking in West and Central Africa. Code of Conduct. Londen: Anti-Slavery 
International. 

Asante, A. & Schaapman, K. (2005). Het onzichtbare zichtbaar gemaakt. Prostitutie in 
Amsterdam anno 2005. Amsterdam: Partij van de Arbeid. 

Baets, Ph. de (2002). De rol en functie van de sociale inspectiediensten in de strijd tegen de 
mensenhandel. Panopticon.Tijdschrift voor strafrecht, criminologie en forensisch welzijnswerk, 
24(5), 384-402. 

Bakels, H.L. e.a. (2003). Schets van het Nederlands arbeidsrecht. Deventer: Kluwer. 

Bales, K. (1999). Disposable people. New slavery in the global economy. Berkeley/ 
Los Angeles/London: University of California Press. 

Belser, P. e.a. (2005). ILO minimum estimate of forced labour in the world. Geneva: ILO. 

Benseddik, A. & Bijl, M. (2004). Onzichtbaar achter glas. Onderzoek naar de bijdrage van 
illegalen in de glastuinbouwsector van het Westland. Den Haag: Stek - voor stad en kerk. 

Bitter, C. & Veldhuis, R. (2006). De wet BIBOB, een tussenstand. Nederlands Juristenblad, 
81(27), 1488-1493. 

Boer, M. de & Wijers, M. (2006). Taking women's rights seriously? An examination of the 
Fourth Report by the Government of The Netherlands on Implementation of the UN Convention 
on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW), 2000-2004. 
Utrecht: Humanist Committee on Human Rights. 

Boermans, B. (2006). Uitgebuit en in de bak. Slachtoffers van mensenhandel in 
vreemdelingenbewaring. Terecht, 25(76), 24-27. 

Borne, A. van der & Kloosterboer, K. (2005). Inzicht in uitbuiting. Handel in minderjarigen in 
Nederland nader onderzocht. Amsterdam: DCI Nederland. 

Borne, A. van der & Kloosterboer, K. (2006). Investigating exploitation: Research into 
trafficking in children in the Netherlands. Amsterdam: DCI The Netherlands. 

Bos-Ollerman, H. (2006). Trafficking in human beings. Investigating the legitimacy and 
implications of a human rights approach. Leiden: Universiteit Leiden (doctoraalscriptie). 

Bovenkerk, F. e.a. (2006). 'Loverboys' of modern pooierschap in Amsterdam. Utrecht:  
Willem Pompe Instituut voor Strafwetenschappen. 

Bressers, H. e.a. (2006): Evaluatie Handhaven op Niveau. Enschede: CSTM Universiteit 
Twente. 

Brouns, M., Kramer, S. & Cense, M. (2003). Het lange wachten op een veilige toekomst. 
Onderzoek naar veiligheid van vrouwen en meisjes in Asielzoekersopvang. Rijswijk: COA. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 231 

Brugman, D. (2006). Lust of Last? Over de beleidsmatige en juridische aspectien van het 
lokale prostitutitebeleid. Nederlands Tijdschrift voor Bestuursrecht, 2006(3) , 21-23. 

Bullens, R. & Horn, E. van (2000). Daad uit 'liefde'. Gedwongen prostitutie van jonge 
meisjes. Justitiële Verkenningen, 26(6), 25-41. 

Bunt, H.G. van de (1996). Financieel rechercheren is geen nieuw kunstje.  
Justitiële Verkenningen, 22(9), 15-21. 

Cachet, A. (2005). Bestel in beweging? Beweging in het bestel? Het tijdschrift voor de politie, 
67(3), 25-29. 

Cardol, G. (2005). Ontheemd, vreemd en minderjarig. Het recht op ontwikkeling van de 
alleenstaande minderjarige vreemdeling in (inter)nationale wet- en regelgeving. Nijmegen:  
Wolf Legal Publishers. 

Centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding (1999). Strijd tegen de 
mensenhandel - Aandacht voor de slachtoffers. Jaarverslag 1998. Brussel: Centrum voor 
gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. 

Centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding (2000). Strijd tegen de 
mensenhandel - Tussen beleid en middelen: de diepe kloof? Jaarverslag 1999. Brussel: Centrum 
voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. 

Centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding (2002). Mensenhandel 
Rechtspraak. Brussel: Centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. 

Centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding (2003). Strijd tegen 
mensenhandel - Pleidooi voor een integrale benadering. Analyse wetgeving en rechtspraak. 
Jaarverslag 2002. Brussel: Centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. 

Centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding (2005). Rapport 
Mensenhandel. Het Belgische mensenhandelbeleid: gewikt en gewogen. Brussel: Centrum voor 
gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. 

Claassen, S. (2005). ‘Dan moeten ze hun mond maar open doen!’ Slachtoffers van mensenhandel 
in vreemdelingenbewaring. Amsterdam: BLinN. 

Cleiren, C.P.M. & Nijboer, J.F. (2006). Strafrecht. Tekst & Commentaar. Deventer: Kluwer. 

College van Procureurs-Generaal (2005). Aanwijzing ontneming. College van Procureurs-
Generaal. 

College van Procureurs-Generaal (2006): Aanwijzing mensenhandel. College van Procureurs-
Generaal. 

Connor, J. & Committee on Equal Opportunities for Women and Men (2001). Domestic 
Slavery. Group of the European People's Party, Ierland. 

Coster, R. (2004). Afsluitende rapportage. Den Haag: Politie Regio Haaglanden. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 232 

Coster, R. (2004). Prostitutie en mensenhandel. Korpsmonitor 2004. Den Haag: PPM/DNP. 

Cyrus, N. (2005). Traffficking for labour and sexual exploitation in Germany. Z.pl.: ILO. 

Daalder, A.L. (2002). Het bordeelverbod opgeheven. Den Haag: WODC. 

Delmonico, F. (2004). No payments for organs. In: Gutmann, T. e.a. (Eds), Ethical, legal, and 
social issues in organ transplantation (pp. 294-297). Lengerich: Pabst Science Publishers. 

Dienst Nationale Recherche Informatie (2004). Nationaal dreigingsbeeld zware of 
georganiseerde criminaliteit. Een eerste proeve. Zoetermeer: KLPD/NRI. 

Dijk, E.M.H. van (2002). Mensenhandel in Nederland 1997 - 2000. Zoetermeer: KLPD/DNP. 

Dijke, A. van e.a. (2006). De betovering verbroken. Methodiek preventie en aanpak 
meisjesprostitutie. Amsterdam: SWP Uitgeverij. 

Dottridge, M. (2006). Reference guide on protecting the rights of child victims of trafficking in 
Europe. Geneva: UNICEF. 

ECPAT (2003). Minderjarigen in de prostitutie in Nederland, een quick scan. Amsterdam: 
ECPAT. 

Eekeren, L.G.J. van (2005). Eindrapportage Plan van Aanpak Loverboys 2003-2005. Zwolle: 
Gemeente Zwolle. 

Eiff, V.L. e.a. (2003). Resultaten nulmeting wet BIBOB 2002. Utrecht: Berenschot. 

Engee, J. e.a. (2000). Witwassen en voordeelontneming. Deel 1. Zoetermeer: KLPD/Kennispunt 
Financieel Rechercheren. 

Eurojust (2006). Jaarverslag 2005. Den Haag: Eurojust. 

Faber, W. & Nunen, A.A.A. van (2002). Het ei van Colombo. Oss: Faber 
Organisatievernieuwing b.v. 

Fazel, I. (2004). Renal Transplantation in Iran: the Iranian model. In: Gutmann, T. e.a. (Eds), 
Ethical, legal, and social issues in organ transplantation (pp. 281-287). Lengerich: Pabst Science 
Publishers. 

Fijnaut, C. & Spapens,T. (2005). Criminaliteit en rechtshandhaving in de Euregio Maas-Rijn. 
Deel 1. De problemen van transnationale (georganiseerde) criminaliteit en de grensoverschrijdende 
politiële, justitiële en bestuurlijke samenwerking. Antwerpen/Oxford: Intersentia. 

Flight, S. e.a. (2006). Evaluatie opheffing bordeelverbod. Gemeentelijk beleid. Amsterdam:  
DSP-groep. 

FNV (2006). Jij, Jerzy. Grievencahier over de behandeling van Poolse en andere buitenlandse 
werknemers in Nederland in 2006. Utrecht: FNV. 

Friedman, E.A. & Friedman, A.L. (2006). Payment for donor kidneys: pros and cons. 
Kidney International, 69(6), 960-962. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 233 

Friele, R.D. e.a. (2006). Derde evaluatie. Wet op de orgaandonatie. Den Haag: ZonMw. 

Gallagher, A.T. (2006). Human trafficking: international law and international responsibility.  
A critical examination of the international legal response to human trafficking with a particular 
focus on the state responsibility regime as a means of securing greater accountability of governments 
for trafficking an related exploitation. Utrecht: Universiteit van Utrecht. 

Gemeente Den Haag (2005). Plan van Aanpak 'Loverboysproblematiek'. Den Haag: 
Gemeente Den Haag. 

Gervais, C.L.M. (2005). Report on promising practices for the prevention of human trafficking. 
Ottawa: National Crime Prevention Centre Department of Public Safety and Emergency 
Preparedness Canada.  

Goderie, M. e.a. (2002). Illegaliteit, onvrijwilligheid en minderjarigheid in de prostitutie een jaar na 
de opheffing van het bordeelverbod. Den Haag/Utrecht: Verwey - Jonker Instituut/ WODC/ 
Ministerie van Justitie. 

Goudswaard, K.P. & Heerma Vos, G.J.J. van (2006). Handhaving in de sociale zekerheid. In: 
Herwijer, M. (Ed.), Sociale zekerheid voor het oog van de meester (pp. 33-46). Deventer: 
Kluwer. 

Goyal, M. e.a. (2002). Economic and Health consequences of selling a kidney in India. 
American Medical Association, 288(13), 1589-1593. 

Graaf, H. de e.a. (2005). Seks onder je 25e. Seksuele gezondheid van jongeren in Nederland  
anno 2005. Utrecht: Rutgers Nisso Groep/ Soa Aids Nederland. 

Grijpink, J.H.A.M. (2003). Identiteitsfraude als uitdaging voor de rechtstaat. 
www.keteninformatisering.nl, 2003, 1-14. 

Grijpink, J.H.A.M. (2006). Keteninformatisering in kort bestek. Theorie en praktijk van 
grootschalige informatie-uitwisseling. Den Haag: Uitgeverij Lemma. 

Gutmann, T. e.a. (Eds.) (2007). Ethical, legal, and social issues in organ transplantation. 
Lengerich: Pabst Science Publishers. 

Hartogh, G. van den (2003). Gift of bijdrage? Over morele aspecten van orgaandonatie.  
Den Haag: Rathenau Instituut. 

Häyry, P. (2004). Human organ trafficking: size of the industry and means of regulation. 
Gutmann, T. e.a. (Eds), Ethical, legal, and social issues in organ transplantation (pp. 265-271). 
Lengerich: Pabst Science Publishers. 

Hiemstra, R.R.K. & Hurkens, M.J. (2006). Analyse huidig COA beleid en instrumentarium voor 
bestrijding van mensenhandel. Project bestrijding mensenhandel. Z.pl.: COA. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 234 

Hiemstra, R.R.K. & Hurkens, M.J. (2006). Gevalsstudie mensenhandel COA. Onderzoeksopzet 
en rapportage als onderdeel van de oriëntatiefase van het project bestrijding mensenhandel. Z.pl.: 
COA. 

Hilhorst, M.T. (2005). Nierdonatie bij leven: ethische vragen bij een dynamische praktijk. 
Ethiek en recht in de gezondheidszorg, 33, 143-200. 

Hoffer, C. & Zwart, H. (1998). Orgaandonatie en de betekenis van levenbeschouwelijke 
opvattingen. Medische antropologie, 10(2), 239-257. 

Hoogenboom, A.B. e.a. (1995). Financieel rechercheren. Den Haag: VUGA Uitgeverij b.v. 

Hoogenboom, B. (2006). Operationele betrokkenheid. Prestatiesturing en bedrijfsvoering 
Nederlandse politie. Den Haag: Elsevier Overheid. 

Hopkins, R. (2005). Ik laat je nooit meer gaan. Het meisje, de vrouw, de handelaar en de agent. 
Breda: De Geus. 

Hughes, D.M. (2004). Best practices to address the demand side of sex trafficking. Z.pl.: z.u. 

Huisman, W. e.a. (2005). Het Van Traa-project. Evaluatie van de bestuurlijke aanpak van 
georganiseerde criminaliteit in Amsterdam. Den Haag: Boom Juridische uitgevers. 

Human Rights Watch (1994). Organ procurement and judicial execution in China. New York: 
Human Rights Watch. 

Human Rights Watch (2004). Blood, sweat and fear. Worker's right in the U.S. meath and poultry 
plants. New York: Human Rights Watch. 

IJzermans, J.N.M. (2005). Orgaantransplantatie: waar liggen de grenzen? Rotterdam:  
Erasmus MC. 

Inspectie Jeugdzorg (2006). Doelgerichte ontwikkeling AMA's. Onderzoek bij 5 COA - AMA 
locaties en 5 Nidos regiokantoren. Utrecht: Inspectie Jeugdzorg. 

Inspectie Openbare Orde en Veiligheid (2006). Opsporing bezocht. Rapportage over de eerste 
fase van het onderzoek naar de kwaliteit van de politiële opsporingstaak. Den Haag: IOOV. 

International Labour Office (2005). A Global Alliance against forced labour. Global report 
under the follow-up to the ILO Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work 2005. 
Geneva: ILO. 

Jacobs, M.J.G., Bruinsma, M.Y. & Haaf, J. van (2006). De kwaliteit van de rechtsbijstand voor 
vreemdelingen in vreemdelingenbewaring in Nederland. Nijmegen: Wolf Legal Publishers. 

Jochoms, M.P.C.M. e.a. (2006). Op prestatie gericht. Over de gevolgen van prestatiesturing en 
prestatieconvenanten voor sturing en uitvoering van het politiewerk. Den Haag:  
Elsevier Overheid. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 235 

Kalmthout, A.M. van e.a. (2005). Terugkeermogelijkheden van vreemdelingen in de 
vreemdelingenbewaring. De vreemdelingenbewaring in Tilburg en Ter Apel. Het dossieronderzoek. 
Deel 1. Nijmegen: Wolf Legal Publishers. 

Kalmthout, A.M. van e.a. (2005). Terugkeermogelijkheden van vreemdelingen in de 
vreemdelingenbewaring. Evaluatie terugkeerprojecten. Deel 2. Nijmegen: Wolf Legal Publishers. 

Kalmthout, A.M. van e.a. (2005). Terugkeermogelijkheden van vreemdelingen in de 
vreemdelingenbewaring. Het vergeten gelaat van de vreemdeling. Deel 3. Nijmegen:  
Wolf Legal Publishers. 

Klaasen, H.M. & Prez, R.M. de (2004). Eindevaluatie ama campus. Opvangen en opvoeden van 
alleenstaande minderjarige asielzoekers. Den Haag: Ministerie van Justitie. 

Kleemans, E.R. (2004). Crossing borders: organised crime in the Netherlands. In: Fijnaut  
C. e.a. (Eds.), Organised Crime in Europe. Concepts, patterns and control policies in the European 
Union and beyond (pp. 303-331). Dordrecht: Springer. 

KLPD & Dienst Nationale Recherche (2005). Criminaliteitsbeeld 2005. Driebergen: 
KLPD/DNR. 

KLPD & Dienst Nationale Recherche (2005). Mensenhandel. Deelrapport criminaliteitsbeeld 
2005. Driebergen: KLPD/DNR. 

Knaapen, R. (2006). Netwerk opvang slachtoffers van mensenhandel. Noord-Oost Brabant. 
Voortgangsverslag 2005. ’s-Hertogenbosch: Stichting Maatschappelijke Dienstverlening. 

Knotter, J.C. (2003). Nuad Thai. Een etnografisch onderzoek naar Thaise massagesalons in 
Nederland. Amsterdam: Universiteit van Amsterdam. 

Kohlman, C. (2003). Er is een land waar vrouwen kunnen werken. De positie van domestic 
workers in Nederland. In: Kohlman, C. e.a. (Eds.), Vrouwen in het migratiebeleid (pp. 37-47). 
Den Haag: E-Quality. 

Koppen, P.J. van (1996). Financieel rechercheren in de opsporing. Justitiële Verkenningen, 
22(9), 57-69. 

Korf, D.J. e.a. (2005). Tippelen na de zone. Straatprostitutie en verborgen prostitutie in 
Amsterdam. Amsterdam: Rozenberg Publishers. 

Korvinus, A.G. e.a. (2006). Mensenhandel: het begrip uitbuiting in art. 273a Sr. Trema,  
29(7), 286-290. 

Kriek, F. (2005). Eindevaluatie jeugdpreventie-plan Gouda 2003 - 2005. Eindrapport. 
Amsterdam: Regioplan beleidsonderzoek. 

Kromhout, M.C.H. & Leystra, Y.H. (2006). Terugkeer en MOB bij Alleenstaande Minderjarige 
Vreemdelingen. Landelijk beleid en lokale praktijk. Den Haag: WODC. 

Kruyer, F. (2006). De huishouding op orde. Blauw-Recherche, 2(17), 15-17. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 236 

Lawson, R.A. (2005). Noot bij JV 2005/425. Den Haag: Sdu Uitgevers. 

Lazerges, C. & Vidalies, A. (2001). L'esclavage, en France, aujourd'hui. Paris:  
Assemblée Nationale. 

Leun, J. van der & Vervoorn, L. (2004). Slavernij-achtige uitbuiting in Nederland. Een 
inventariserende literatuurstudie in het kader van de uitbreiding van de strafbaarstelling van 
mensenhandel. Den Haag: Boom Juridische uitgevers. 

LOGO (2005). De rekening. De praktijk van het opvang- en terugkeerbeleid. Groningen: 
LOGO. 

LOVS (2007). Bundel voor strafrechtspleging. Lovs-Bundel 2007. Den Haag: LOVS. 

Lugt, A. van der & Zoetekouw, R. (2003). De strijd tegen georganiseerde illegale arbeid - het 
barrièremodel. In: H. Wietzema Menkhorst e.a. (Eds.), Jaarboek fraudebestrijding. Alphen a/d 
Rijn: Kluwer. 

Lünnemann, K. e.a. (2006). Ernstig bedreigde vrouwen in de vrouwenopvang. Onderzoek naar 
veiligheidsrisico's en de mogelijkheden van onderduikadressen. Utrecht: Verweij-Jonker 
Instituut/Federatie Opvang. 

Majoor, M. (2001). Als sex werken wordt. Amsterdam: Prostitutie Informatie Centrum. 

Matas, D. & Kilgour, D. (2007). Bloody harvest. Revised report into allegations of organ 
harvesting of Falun Gong practitioners in China. Ottawa, z.u. 

Meloen, J. e.a. (2003). Buit en besteding. Een empirisch onderzoek naar de omvang, de kenmerken 
en de besteding van misdaadgeld. Den Haag: Elsevier Overheid. 

Mens, L. van (1992). Prostitutie in bedrijf. Organisatie, Management en Arbeidsverhoudingen in 
Seksclubs en Privéhuizen. Delft: Eburon. 

Meuwese, S. & c.s. (2005). Handboek Internationaal Jeugdrecht. Nijmegen: Ars Aequi Libri. 

Miedema, F. e.a. (2003). Evaluatie au pair regeling. Nijmegen: ITS. 

Minister voor Vreemdelingen en Integratie (2004). Illegalennota. Aanvullende maatregelen 
voor het tegengaan van illegaliteit en de aanpak van uitbuiters van illegalen in Nederland.  
Den Haag: Ministerie van Justitie. 

Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koninkrijksrelaties, Ministerie van Justitie & de 
Nederlandse Politie (2003). Landelijk Kader Nederlandse Politie 2003 -2006. Den Haag: 
Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken en Koningrijksrelaties, Ministerie van Justitie, Politie. 

Minister van Justitie (2004). Plan van Aanpak. Ordening & Bescherming Prostitutiesector. 
Aanvullende maatregelen voor het bereiken van de doelstellingen bij de opheffing van het algemeen 
bordeelverbod. Den Haag: Ministerie van Justitie.  



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 237 

Ministerie van Justitie/Directie Handhaving (2004). Nationaal Actieplan Mensenhandel. 
Aanvullende maatregelen van het kabinet in het kader van de aanpak van mensenhandel in 
Nederland. Den Haag: Ministerie van Justitie. 

Moors, J.A. & Borgers, M.J. (2006). Knelpunten in de internationale samenwerking in 
ontnemingszaken. Tilburg: IVA. 

Mosselman, M. & Rij, C. van (2005). Naleving van de Wet arbeid vreemdelingen. Een eerste 
onderzoek onder werkgevers. Amsterdam: Regioplan Beleidsonderzoek. 

Munro, V.E. (2006). Stopping traffic? A comparative study of responses to the trafficking in 
women for prostitution. British Journal of Criminology, 46(2), 318-333. 

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel (2002). Mensenhandel - Eerste rapportage van de 
Nationaal Rapporteur. Den Haag: BNRM. 

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel (2004). Mensenhandel - Derde rapportage van de 
Nationaal Rapporteur. Den Haag: BNRM. 

Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel (2005). Mensenhandel. Aanvullende kwantitatieve 
gegevens.Vierde rapportage van de Nationaal Rapporteur. Den Haag: BNRM. 

Nelen, J. e.a. (1996). Het vermogen te ontnemen - Wetsevaluatie fase 2. Den Haag: WODC. 

Nelen, J. & Sabee, V. (1998). Het vermogen te ontnemen - Evaluatie van de ontnemingswetgeving, 
eindrapport. Den Haag: WODC. 

Nuyts, G. e.a. (2006). Awareness-raising of judicial authorities concerning in human beings. 
Handbook volume 2. Country reports European legal frameworks. The Hague: IOM. 

O'Briain, M. e.a. (2004). Joint East West research on trafficking in children for sexual purposes in 
Europe: the sending countries. Amsterdam: ECPAT. 

O'Connell-Davidson, J. (2006). Part I: Review of evidence and debates on 'the demand side of 
trafficking'. Z.pl.: Z.u. 

Oepkes, N. e.a. (2004). Perspectief. Als de toekomst onzeker is. Utrecht: Vluchtelingenwerk. 

Openbaar Ministerie (2004). De strafrechtelijke aanpak van georganiseerde misdaad in 
Nederland 2005 - 2010. Den Haag: Openbaar Ministerie. 

Openbaar Ministerie (2006). Perspectief op 2010. Den Haag: Openbaar Ministerie. 

Otten, L. (2005). The UN trafficking protocol. Conciliating different perspectives on human 
trafficking? Utrecht: z.u. 

Pajnik, M. & Kavcic, U. (2006). The demand side of sex: perspectives on trafficking and 
prostitution. The case of Slovenia. Ljubljana: Mirovni Institute. 

Pearson, E. (2004). Coercion in the kidney trade? A background study on trafficking in human 
organs worldwide. Eschborn: GTZ. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 238 

Peters, J. (2005). Van wie is de politie eigenlijk? Het tijdschrift voor de politie, 67(9), 27-28. 

Pheijffer, M. e.a. (1997). Financieel rechercheren. Theorie en praktijk. Deventer: Kluwer. 

Politie Nederland (2006). Wenkend perspectief. Strategische visie op politieel 
informatiemanagement & technologie 2006-2010. Driebergen: Politie Nederland. 

Politieacademie (2004). Leerboek ontneming. Zutphen: Politieacademie. 

Poot, C.J. de e.a. (2004). Rechercheportret. Over dilemma's in de opsporing. Alphen a/d Rijn: 
Kluwer. 

Projectgroep Visie op de politiefunctie & Raad van Hoofdcommissarissen (2005).  
Politie in ontwikkeling. Visie op de politiefunctie. Den Haag: NPI. 

Punt, H.G. (2003). Praktijkboek ontneming van het wederrechtelijk verkregen voordeel.  
Den Haag: Sdu Uitgevers. 

Raad voor de Rechtspraak (2004). Jaarverslag 2003. Den Haag: Raad voor de Rechtspraak. 

Regiopolitie IJsselland, Kernteam Noord- en Oost-Nederland, Unit Mensensmokkel, 
KLPD, DNRI & IAM (z.jr.). Protocol vermissing AMA. Z.pl.: z.u. 

Reputur, L. (2005). Werkplan 2006. Informatiepunt Jeugdprostitutie. Utrecht: TransAct, 
Informatiepunt Jeugdprostitutie. 

Reputur, L. (2006). Meerjarenplan jeugdprostitutie 2007/2008/2009. Jeugdprostitutie: hoe staan 
we ervoor? Naar een Expertisepunt Jeugdprostitutie. Utrecht: TransAct, Informatiepunt 
Jeugdprostitutie. 

Rijken, C. (2000). Van asielzoekster tot prostituee. Nemesis, 16(1), 4-11. 

Rijken, C. (2006). Joint Investigation Teams: principles, practice, and problems Lessons 
learnt from the first efforts to establish a JIT. Utrecht Law Review, 2(2), 99-118. 

Rijkschroeff, B.R. (1998). Etnisch ondernemerschap. De Chinese horeceasector in Nederland en in 
de Verenigde Staten van Amerika. Groningen: Rijksuniversiteit van Groningen. 

Rothman, D.J. e.a. (1997). The Bellagio Task Force Report on Transplantation, Bodily 
Integrity, and the International Traffic in Organs. Transplantation proceedings,  
29(6), 2739-2745. 

Rothman, S.M. & Rothman, D.J. (2003). The organ market. The New York Review of Books, 
50(16), 49-51. 

Ruijmschoot, L. (2006). Domestic work, decent work? Opmaat naar campagne ter verbetering 
van de arbeidsomstandigheden bij huishoudelijk werk wereldwijd. Utrecht: CNV Internationaal. 

SAMAH (2006). Jaarverslag 2005. Z.pl.: SAMAH. 

Scharlaken Koord (z.jr.). Methodiek Uitstapprogramma. Z.pl.: z.u. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

 239 

Scheper-Hughes, N. (2002). The end of the body: commodity fetishism and the global traffic 
in organs. SAIS Review, 22(1), 61-80. 

Schmidt, G.E. & Rijken, C.R.J.J. (2005). Juridische aspecten van gedwongen huwelijken. 
Onderzoek voor de Adviescommissie voor Vreemdelingenzaken. Den Haag: ACVZ. 

Schravendijk, S.M. van (2006). De handel in organen; stand van zaken en discussie. Een thesis 
over de internationale orgaanhandel, mensenhandel met het oogmerk van orgaanverwijdering, de 
betrokkenheid van Nederland(ers) en het ethische debat hieromtrent. Utrecht: Universiteit van 
Utrecht (doctoraalscriptie). 

Secherling, P.H.T. & Nelen, J.M. (1997). Financieel rechercheren in Nederland.  
Een literatuurverkenning. Den Haag: WODC. 

Sikkel, D. e.a. (2006): Methoden voor omvangschattingen van verborgen populaties, met name 
illegalen. Den Haag: WODC. 

SIOD (2006). De bestrijding van uitbuiting met slavernijachtige kenmerken binnen het domein van 
werk en inkomen. Den Haag: SIOD. 

Skrivánková, K. (2006). Trafficking for forced labour. UK country report. London: Anti-Slavery 
International. 

Sluis, A. van der e.a. (2006). Cijfers en stakeholders. Prestatiesturing en de gevolgen voor de 
maatschappelijke en politiek-bestuurlijke relaties van de politie. Den Haag: Elsevier Overheid. 

Soudijn, M.R.I. (2006). Chinese Human Smuggling in Transit. Den Haag:  
Boom Juridische uitgevers. 

Steunpunt Seksueel Geweld & GGD (2005). Naar een aanpak van loverboyproblematiek. Visie 
en ervaringen van Amsterdamse deskundigen. Amsterdam: Steunpunt Seksueel Geweld/GGD. 

Stichting Religieuzen Tegen Vrouwenhandel (2007). Verslag van het SRTV lustrumjaar 2006. 
Den Bosch: SRTV. 

Stichting Tegen Vrouwenhandel (2006). Jaarverslag 2005. Amersfoort: STV. 

Stichting Tegen Vrouwenhandel (2006). Werkplan 2006. Amersfoort: STV. 

SVB Forensic business experts & investigators (2004). Evaluatie grote ontnemingszaken. Den 
Haag: WODC. 

Taskforce Vrouwen,Veiligheid en Conflict (2006). Slotdocument Taskforce Vrouwen, 
Veiligheid en Conflict. Den Haag: Taskforce Vrouwen, Veiligheid en Conflict. 

Terpstra, L. e.a. (2005). Loverboys, een publieke zaak. Tien portretten. Amsterdam: Uitgeverij 
SWP/Terpstra & Van Dijke. 

Tinnemans, W. (2005). Een grensoverschrijdende kwestie. Rapportage van een activerend 
onderzoek naar illegalen in illegale arbeid. Utrecht/Amsterdam: Stichting BMP. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 240 

Transact & Informatiepunt Jeugdprostitutie (2005). Werkplan 2005. Utrecht: Transact. 

Tweede Kamer der Staten-Generaal (2004). Nationaal Actieplan Mensenhandel. Den Haag: 
Tweede Kamer der Staten-Generaal. 

Unger, B. (2006). De omvang en het effect van witwassen. Justitiële Verkenningen, 32(2), 21-33. 

United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime (2006). Trafficking in persons. Global 
patterns. Vienna: UNODC. 

Vermeulen, G. (2006). Matroesjka's: tien jaar later. Repressie en controle als speerpunten 
van het vernieuwde mensenhandelbeleid?. Panopticon.Tijdschrift voor strafrecht, criminologie 
en forensisch welzijnswerk, 2(6), 1-10. 

Vermeulen, G. e.a. (2006). The SIAMSECT files. Standarised templates and blueprint for EU-
wide collection of statistical information and analysis on missing and sexually exploited children and 
trafficking in human beings. Antwerpen: Maklu uitgevers. 

Verrest, P.A.M. (2006). De strafbaarstelling van witwassen. Justitiële Verkenningen,  
32(2), 41-53.  

Verrest, P.A.M. & Buruma, Y. (2006). Waarom pakken we het criminele geld niet gewoon 
af? Justitiële Verkenningen, 32(2), 54-66. 

Vianen, R. van e.a. (2006). Monitor over de positie van slachtoffers mensenhandel in Nederland. 
Woerden: Adviesbureau Van Montfoort. 

Vlek, F. e.a. (2004). Uit balans: politie en bestel in de knel. State-of-the-art van kennis en inzichten. 
Zeist: Kerckebosch. 

Wegen J. van der (2004). Het fiscale vangnet. Recherchemagazine, 3(5), 18-19. 

Wegen, J.van der (2005). De verzilvering van de ontneming. Recherche Magazine, 4(3), 10-11. 

Wegen, J.van der (2005). Tegen haar wil. Blauw Recherche, 4(1), 14-15. 

Wolf, J. e.a. (2006). Maat en baat van de vrouwenopvang. Onderzoek naar vraag en aanbod. 
Amsterdam: SWP uitgevers. 

Z.a. (2003). Eindrapportage landelijke escortpilot. Z.pl.: z.u. 

Zimmerman, C. e.a. (2006). Stolen smiles: a summary report on the physical and psychological 
health consequences of women and adolescents trafficked in Europe. London: The London 
School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine. 
 



 241 

Appendix 1 
 THB provision in the Dutch Criminal Code 

Article 273f Criminal Code (in force since 1 January 2005) 
(non-official, English translation) 

 

(1) Any person who: 
1. by force, violence or other act, by the threat of violence or other act, by extortion, fraud, 

deception or the misuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs, by the misuse 
of a vulnerable position or by giving or receiving remuneration or benefits in order to 
obtain the consent of a person who has control over this other person recruits, trans-
ports, moves, accommodates or shelters another person, with the intention of exploiting 
this other person or removing his or her organs; 

2. recruits, transports, moves, accommodates or shelters a person with the intention of ex-
ploiting that other person or removing his or her organs, when that person has not yet 
reached the age of eighteen years; 

3. recruits, takes with him or abducts a person with the intention of inducing that person to 
make himself/herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for 
remuneration in another country; 

4. forces or induces another person by the means referred to under (a) to make him-
self/herself available for performing work or services or making his/her organs available 
or takes any action in the circumstances referred to under (1) which he knows or may 
reasonably be expected to know will result in that other person making himself/herself 
available for performing labour or services or making his/her organs available; 

5. induces another person to make himself/herself available for performing sexual acts with 
or for a third party for remuneration or to make his/her organs available for remunera-
tion or takes any action towards another person which he knows or may reasonably be 
expected to know that this will result in that other person making himself/herself avail-
able for performing these acts or making his/her organs available for remuneration, 
when that other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years; 

6. wilfully profits from the exploitation of another person; 
7. wilfully profits from the removal of organs from another person, while he knows or may 

reasonably be expected to know that the organs of that person have been removed under 
the circumstances referred to under (1); 

8. wilfully profits from the sexual acts of another person with or for a third party for remu-
neration or the removal of that person’s organs for remuneration, when this other per-
son has not yet reached the age of eighteen years; 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 242 

9. forces or induces another person by the means referred to under (a) to provide him with 
the proceeds of that person’s sexual acts with or for a third party or of the removal of that 
person’s organs; 

shall be guilty of trafficking in human beings and as such liable to a term of imprisonment 
not exceeding six years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties: 

(2) Exploitation comprises at least the exploitation of another person in prostitution, other 
forms of sexual exploitation, forced or compulsory labour or services, slavery, slavery like 
practices or servitude. 

(3) The following offences shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding 
eight years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties: 
1. offences as described in the first paragraph if they are committed by two or more per-

sons acting in concert; 
2. offences as described in the first paragraph if such offences are committed in respect of a 

person who is under the age of sixteen. 

(4) The offences as described in the first paragraph, committed by two or more persons act-
ing in concert under the circumstance referred to in paragraph 3 under (b), shall be punish-
able with a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years and a fifth category fine*, or either 
of these penalties. 

(5) If one of the offences described in the first paragraph results in serious physical injury or 
threatens the life of another person, it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not 
exceeding twelve years and a fifth category fine*, or either of these penalties. 

(6) If one of the offences referred to in the first paragraph results in death, it shall be punish-
able with a term of imprisonment not exceeding fifteen years and a fifth category fine*, or 
either of these penalties. 

(7) Article 251 is applicable mutatis mutandis. 

*A fifth category fine is a fine of maximum € 67,000,- 
 



 243 

Appendix 2 
 Justification of research methods used 

BNRM collects information in a variety of ways. This Appendix explains the aims, research 
questions and methods used for the various BNRM studies. 

1 The B9 research 

Aim and research questions 
In principle, BNRM annually researches the files supplied by the IND, which include all ap-
plications for and grants of residence permits in the context of the B9-regulation. For vari-
ous reasons, the current report only covers 2005. 
The research questions are: 
– How many victims/ witnesses applied for a B9 residence permit? 
– How many victims/ witnesses were awarded a B9 residence permit? 
– What are the (background) characteristics of individuals holding a B9 residence permit? 
– In which police districts did the applications for B9 residence permits originate? 

Research method 
The IND supplied files containing all contacts for the period from 2001 to 2005 where the 
B9-regulation played some part. These files accordingly contained all applications for B9 
residence permits (or extensions of them) and all approvals. BNRM aggregated all of the 
files at the individual level and collated them. This file was then subjected to more detailed 
analysis. This process highlighted a number of inadequacies. We learned from consultations 
with the IND that these shortcomings were the result of technical problems that arose 
through the IND taking over the aliens administration, which was previously the duty of the 
Aliens Police. Various attempts have been made to clean up the registration systems. The re-
sults for 2003 and 2004 remained unsatisfactory, however. This is why it was decided to re-
port only on 2005. 

Incidental comments on the research 
Firstly: the IND’s registration is not consistent and/or unambiguous on whether applica-
tions and awards of residence permits are linked to the B9-regulation. The result is that 
someone applying for a residence permit under the B9-regulation may be registered as hav-
ing obtained a permit on different grounds. The reverse is also true: B9 residence permits 
were granted to individuals who had not applied for them when they were first registered. 
All of these individuals have been included in the analyses on the assumption that they relied 
on the B9-regulation either in their application or when a permit was awarded. It is possible 
that these files did not include every individual who invoked the B9-regulation, as reliance 
on the B9-regulation is not registered by the IND as a matter of course or compulsorily. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 244 

Secondly: the IND does not record whether an individual obtains a B9 residence permit as a 
victim or as a witness. 
Thirdly: the B9 data relates only to victims and witnesses of THB who are residing in the 
Netherlands illegally. Additionally, the IND files only include data on individuals eligible for 
a temporary residence permit because they have reported the crime of THB. Victims are not 
registered by the IND during the period available to them for reflection. 

2 The BNRM police study 

Aim and research questions 
In each of the earlier reports, BNRM included many details of successfully concluded inves-
tigations into THB. Since the beginning of 2004, BNRM is now only collecting certain key 
information regarding these investigations. The aim of the current police research was to 
obtain an understanding of the number of successfully completed police investigations into 
THB. 

The research questions are: 
– How many investigations for THB did the police successfully complete in the Netherlands 

in 2004? 
– How many official reports/witness statements did these investigations relate to? 
– What type of sex work were the victims supposed to do? 

Research method 
All of the investigations into THB which were successfully completed in 2004 were listed in 
the now customary fashion. The total number was 60. The team leaders for these investiga-
tions were interviewed by telephone. The questions asked in this interview, based on a short 
questionnaire, related to the general characteristics of the THB concerned. We also asked 
questions about the extent of any financial investigation that might have accompanied the 
detective work. 

3 The BNRM research into financial investigations 

Aim and research questions 
The aim of the research was to establish the part played by financial investigation in the suc-
cessfully completed criminal investigations into THB, or what part such investigation might 
have played. 
The research questions, concerning five sub-areas, are: 

Financial investigations in THB cases (input) 
– To what extent is financial investigation undertaken in THB cases (from the start), i.e. 

what efforts are made to obtain financial information, record it accurately and analyse it? 
– Which factors determine whether or not this happens? 



APPENDIX 

 245 

– How is the financial investigation undertaken? 
– Do THB cases have any especially significant features for financial investigations? 
– What bottlenecks occur during financial investigations (in THB cases)? 
– How could financial investigations in THB cases be encouraged? 

Financial investigations in THB cases (output) 
– To what extent are the (potential) aims of financial investigations achieved? 
– Does financial investigation also produce other valuable results? 
– How are illegally obtained profits calculated? 
– To what extent are confiscation procedures deployed in THB cases? 
– To what extent is money successfully confiscated in THB cases? 

Missed opportunities 
– How often is there (wrongly) a failure to carry out financial investigation in THB cases? 
– What are the reasons for this? 

Alternatives 
– Are there other ways to attack human traffickers in financial terms, apart from confisca-

tion? 
– Has this happened in one or more cases? 
– What were the results? 

Victims 
– Do victims of THB profit (indirectly) from financial investigations? 
– How? 
– How can financial investigations (also) benefit victims? 

Research method and the tools used 
The research was undertaken in three parts: 

Part 1: Study of literature and general orientation 
Information on financial investigations (and confiscation, so far as relevant) was studied for 
the current research. This included academic research, policy reports and memoranda, arti-
cles in newspapers and (professional) periodicals, study materials for police courses in this 
area and informational material in print and on the Internet. We also attended conferences 
and symposia and had discussions with experts in this field. 

Part 2: General characteristics of criminal investigations/financial investigations (2004) 
Questions were asked, during the telephone interviews, of the team leaders in the 60 crimi-
nal investigations into THB successfully completed in 2004 as regards the extent of financial 
investigation that had been undertaken and any results it produced. If financial investigators 
had also been involved in the case, we also tried to contact them (if necessary) to obtain in-



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 246 

formation. Five cases that were interesting from the perspective of financial investigation 
were chosen for case studies. For these case studies, the team leaders for the police investiga-
tions and the financial investigators were interviewed (in greater depth) and we also studied 
the files produced by the police. 

Part 3: Confiscation (2003) 
The fourth NRM report presented the features of every successfully completed investiga-
tion into THB in 2003. For nine of the cases, the team leaders indicated at the time that a 
confiscation sanction had been or would be claimed. The present research enquired as to the 
results produced by this. The number of cases in which a confiscation sanction was actually 
claimed turned out to be significantly lower. The results of this part of the research accord-
ingly relate to four completed cases from 2003 rather than nine. One of these four was ex-
amined as a case study. The case description is based on information from an interview with 
the financial investigator concerned, the police file on the case and research into the case car-
ried out by students at the police academy in the context of their training (Volmerink & 
Jager, 2004). 

Two questionnaires were used in the research: one for telephone interviews and one for the 
case studies. Because of the exploratory nature of the research, both of the questionnaires 
contained many open questions. 

Incidental comments on the research 
Collecting the information took longer than had been planned. The most important reasons 
for this were that the police appeared to have less time available for interviews than previ-
ously, that information on financial investigations was not always readily available, and the 
extra time needed to contact the financial investigators concerned. The information we 
asked for could not be obtained in some cases. The information was also sometimes difficult 
to interpret because (tactical) investigators were not always aware of the (statutory) basis for 
the financial investigation that had been carried out, or what the results had been in financial 
terms. In addition, many open questions were asked, so that we cannot always say whether 
the results we obtained would apply to all of the investigated cases. 
Finally, we only studies successfully completed criminal investigations. It is possible that fi-
nancial investigation played a greater part in the successfully completed cases than in the 
cases that were (necessarily) discontinued. 

4 The Public Prosecution Service data investigation 

Introduction 
At the request of BNRM, annual analyses are carried out on a ‘THB’ sub-file from the na-
tional Public Prosecution Service database, which includes information on the prosecution 



APPENDIX 

 247 

of suspects drawn from the 19 District Court area prosecution offices.1 The analyses provide 
a picture of procedural progress at first instance. Public Prosecution Service data includes in-
formation on cases and offences. A (criminal) case, in the context of prosecution, is a case 
against one accused. Criminal cases against individual suspects may relate to more than one 
offence. 

Aim and research questions 
The aim of the research was to provide an understanding of how suspects of THB are prose-
cuted in the Netherlands. The research questions were: 
– How many cases relating to THB were registered with the Public Prosecution Service in 

2004 and 2005? 
– How often did these involve underage victims? 
– How are the suspects classified as regards gender, age and country of origin? 
– Which offences, apart from THB, are they suspected of having committed? 
– How did the Public Prosecution Service process the cases in 2004 and 2005? 
– How did the courts dispose of the cases in 2004 and 2005? 
– How often did the various parties intimate appeals against court verdicts? 
– What developments have occurred during the period in relation to THB? 

Research method 
We selected the cases from the entire Public Prosecution Service database which involved 
(at least) the registration of an offence of THB. No specific cohorts of perpetrators or vic-
tims were followed in the analyses, but we checked the data for each year to see how many 
cases were registered and how many were processed by the Public Prosecution Service and 
disposed of by the court.2 

Additional comments 
The Public Prosecution Service data only includes the main offence that is charged. Also, 
where the charge includes more than one main offence, only the first offence is registered in 
the Public Prosecution Service database. What this means is that some of the information 
reaching the Public Prosecution Service, and which might play a part during the course of 
the prosecution, cannot be found within the Public Prosecution Service data. 

                                                                      
1 The analyses are carried by SiBa (Statistical Information Provision and Policy Analysis) of the Scientific 

Research & Documentation Centre (WODC). 
2 This means that we did not necessarily deal with the same cases. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 248 

5 The BNRM research into exploitation in sectors other than the sex 
industry 

Working definition 
The working definition of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry as applied in 
this research is: Serious abuse in an employment situation, with the victim being coerced to 
undertake work or services in a sector other than prostitution. Exploitation brings human 
rights into play. 

Research questions 
– Do the relevant players have concrete practical experience of the occurrence of exploita-

tion in sectors other than the sex industry in the Netherlands? If so: 
– Which manifestations of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry are they aware 

of? 
– What are the economic sectors where exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry 

occurs? 
– Who are the victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and what factors 

render people vulnerable to it? 
– Who is guilty of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and how do these peo-

ple operate?3 
– To what extent can the situations described by the respondents be classified as exploita-

tion as defined in Article 273f Dutch Criminal Code? 

Research methods 
A study of literature, including Dutch policy documents and public and confidential gov-
ernment service documents, studies of particular professions, ethnic commercial enterprise 
and employment market fraud, investigations into particular groups such as au pairs and 
people held in aliens’ detention, and reports on topics associated with THB such as people 
smuggling. Also literature concerning exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry in 
other countries: reports covering the entire world or Europe, including those from the ILO, 
as well as studies on the situation in Germany, Belgium, France and the United Kingdom. 

Enquiries. Brief questionnaires were set out on a large scale. For this ‘grapeshot method’ we 
opted to draw the research, and with it the subject matter, to the attention of as many or-
ganisations and individuals as possible who might be in contact with clients who were po-
tentially vulnerable to exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. The aim of the 
questionnaire was to form a picture of the symptoms of this type of exploitation that are 

                                                                      
3 So far as the respondents were aware, since they had been approached on the basis of their possible contacts 

with victims of exploitation. 



APPENDIX 

 249 

picked up on in practice, and also to identify individuals to interview about actual cases. The 
enquiry consisted of open questions relating to the period from 2000 onwards.4 

Interviews. Respondents who indicated they were aware of examples of abuse in employ-
ment situations, and who were prepared to cooperate, were interviewed either in person or 
by telephone.5 These semi-structured interviews attempted to obtain case descriptions that 
were as full as possible. A direct approach was made to organisations and individuals where 
we assumed or knew in advance that they might know of examples of exploitation in sectors 
other than the sex industry or have expertise in specific subject areas. One lawyer also made 
contact with BNRM on his own initiative in connection with a relevant case. 

Study of completed investigation files. BNRM enquired as to whether the police investiga-
tions into THB for sexual exploitation, which we were already aware of and which had been 
concluded during the period between 2000 and 2004, also contained indications of exploita-
tion in sectors other than the sex industry. Five investigation files were studied as a result 
and these supplied two case descriptions. 

Accompanying an employment market fraud team (AMF-team). The Health and Safety In-
spectorate’s AMF teams check up on compliance with the Aliens Employment Act. In order 
to obtain a picture of the practicalities of workplace checks and the operating methods of the 
AMF teams, we spent one day with a team carrying out checks in the construction, agricul-
tural and horticultural sectors. 

Response rate 
Several factors contributed to the non-response rate, including the method of approach 
(wide distribution of a brief questionnaire). Many of the organisations and individuals who 
were approached were also surprised at the possible link between their practical experiences 
and THB. It is possible that some organisations who devote themselves to the interests of 
people without residence permits did not respond from fear that the results of the research 
might contribute towards what they would describe as the ‘hunt’ for illegals. Many of the 
professionals we approached also had a bond of trust with their clients and had to deal with 
professional confidentiality. This might have been the reason why some refused to provide 
any information, even though this could be done anonymously and all of the information 
was dealt with in confidence.6 

                                                                      
4 Every questionnaire followed the same pattern. The layout or wording was adjusted to the specific target group 

where necessary. For instance, respondents from the Health and Safety Inspectorate were asked what they did 
if they came across possible exploitation during checks at workplaces, and the questionnaire for lawyers 
explored any legal actions considered or undertaken following indications of an exploitative situation. 

5 With the exception of the HSI inspectors and SIOD investigators. 
6 The responses from lawyers indicated varying interpretations of professional confidentiality. According to the 

Secretary of the Netherlands Bar Association [Nederlandse Orde van Advocaten], it is always a personal decision 
for the lawyer as to whether or not he invokes the right to professional confidentiality. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 250 

Incidental comments on the research 
The recent introduction of the new offence meant that there had scarcely been any investi-
gation or prosecution of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry at the time when 
the research was carried out. This is one of the reasons why not much information was ob-
tained from the police. The Expertise Centre on Human Trafficking & People Smuggling 
(EMM) did provide information at the start of 2006 on the number of ongoing criminal in-
vestigations into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. This operational infor-
mation is not discussed at this point. The input from trade unions and employer organisa-
tions was also limited, although these are potentially important sources and players as re-
gards exploitation in these other sectors. 
The case study material is a collection of indications taken at a given moment in time. Once 
the case details had been noted, further developments in the case were not pursued. This 
means, for example, that we do not know whether certain exploitative situations are still go-
ing on, or the results of actions such as official reports of THB and wage claims. The infor-
mation is also second-hand. The perspectives of victims and perpetrators are lacking, be-
cause there was no contact with victims and no field work where exploitation actually oc-
curs. 
 



 251 

Appendix 3 
 Explanation of tables and statistics 

1 Explanation of the tables 

This report contains several tables. The following comments are important for a proper un-
derstanding of the tables. 

When the table figures are added up, they do not always reach 100%. For ease of reading, 
however, 100% is always used as the sum total in the tables. 

A dash (-) in the tables indicates that the number is zero or that the appropriate percentage is 
0%. When the figure is more than zero but the percentage rounds out to 0% then the dash is 
replaced by 0%. 

2 Explanation of the statistics used 

Standard deviation 
This report sometimes states the average figure. The actual number and the standard devia-
tion are also indicated occasionally. The standard deviation indicates the extent of diver-
gence among the figures used to calculate the average: the higher the standard deviation, the 
greater the divergence. 

Index figure 
Some tables indicate an index figure. The index figure shows how far the number – of sus-
pects, for instance – has changed in a particular year in relation to a base year. The year cho-
sen as the base year is stated in the table heading. This year is set at 100. An index figure 
greater than 100 reflects an increase in relation to the base year and a figure below 100 repre-
sents a decline. 
 





 253 

Appendix 4 
 Supplementary tables 

Table B3.2 Nationality of (possible) victims registered with the STV, per annum 

Nationality 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

Afghan  - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 

Albanian 4 1% 8 2% 2 1% 8 2% 2 0% 24 1% 

Algerian - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 

Angolan 1 0% 3 1% 2 1% 2 0% 8 2% 16 1% 

Antigua and Barbadian - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 

Armenian - - - - 3 1% 3 1% - - 6 0% 

Bangladeshi - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 

Belarussian 1 0% 8 2% - - 12 3% 3 1% 24 1% 

Belgian - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 3 0% 

Beninese - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 2 0% 4 0% 

Bosnian 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% 4 0% 

Brazilian 1 0% - - 12 5% 5 1% 8 2% 26 2% 

British - - - - - - 2 0% - - 2 0% 

Bulgarian 40 14% 59 17% 48 19% 55 14% 52 12% 254 15% 

Burundian - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 3 0% 

Cameroonian 2 1% 10 3% 5 2% 11 3% 4 1% 32 2% 

Canadian - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 

Chinese 10 4% 8 2% 8 3% 9 2% 5 1% 40 2% 

Colombian 1 0% 2 1% 1 0% 4 1% 1 0% 9 1% 

Congolese 1 0% 3 1% 1 0% - - 3 1% 8 0% 

Croatian - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 

Cuban - - 3 1% - - 2 0% - - 5 0% 

Czech 8 3% 6 2% 3 1% 2 0% 18 4% 37 2% 

Dominican - - 3 1% - - 2 0% 1 0% 6 0% 

Dutch 11 4% 18 5% 11 4% 59 15% 98 23% 197 12% 

Ecuadorian - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - 2 0% 

Egyptian 2 1% - - - - - - - - 2 0% 

Eritrean 1 0% - - - - 1 0% - - 2 0% 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 254 

Nationality 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

Estonian 1 0% - - 2 1% 1 0% - - 4 0% 

Ethiopian - - 1 0% 2 1% 2 0% 1 0% 6 0% 

French - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 

Georgian 2 1% 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 4 0% 

German - - 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 2 0% 5 0% 

Ghanaian 2 1% 2 1% 1 0% 6 1% 2 0% 13 1% 

Greek - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 

of Guinea-Bissau - - - - - - 5 1% 4 1% 9 1% 

Guinean 3 1% 6 2% 5 2% 3 1% 4 1% 21 1% 

Guyanese - - 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 

Hungarian 4 1% 1 0% - - 3 1% 9 2% 17 1% 

Indonesian - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 

Iranian - - 1 0% - - 5 1% - - 6 0% 

Iraqi - - - - - - 2 0% - - 2 0% 

Irish - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 2 0% 

Italian 1 0% - - - - - - 2 0% 3 0% 

Ivory Coast - - 4 1% 2 1% 2 0% - - 8 0% 

Kazakh 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 

Kenyan - - - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 3 0% 

Kyrghiz 1 0% - - 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 

Latvian 1 0% 1 0% - - 1 0% 3 1% 6 0% 

Liberian 4 1% - - 2 1% 1 0% 1 0% 8 0% 

Lithuanian 10 4% 13 4% 9 4% 3 1% 3 1% 38 2% 

Luxembourg - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 

Macedonian - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 

Malawian - - - - - - - - - - - - 

Malaysian - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 

Moroccan 1 0% 4 1% 2 1% 11 4% 11 3% 29 2% 

Mexican - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 

Moldavian 9 3% 14 4% 1 0% 6 1% 2 0% 32 2% 

Mongolian - - 2 1% - - - - 2 0% 4 0% 

Namibian 1 0% - - - - - - 1 0% 2 0% 



APPENDIX 

 255 

Nationality 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N % N % N % N % N % N % 

Nigerian 15 5% 45 13% 21 8% 39 10% 28 7% 148 9% 

North-Korean - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 

Norwegian - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 

Pakistani - - - - - - 1 0% - - 1 0% 

Philippino - - - - 1 0% 2 0% - - 3 0% 

Polish 4 1% 9 3% 3 1% 8 2% 13 3% 37 2% 

Portuguese - - - - - - - - 1 0% 1 0% 

Romanian 4 1% 22 6% 31 12% 45 11% 23 5% 125 7% 

Russian 27 10% 16 5% 11 4% 14 3% 13 3% 81 5% 

Rwandan - - 1 0% - - 1 0% - - 2 0% 

Senegalese - - - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 3 0% 

Sierra Leonse 6 2% 12 3% 11 4% 6 1% 14 3% 49 3% 

Slovakian 1 0% 2 1% 2 1% 3 1% 10 2% 18 1% 

Somalian - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 

Sudanese 1 0% 1 0% - - 2 0% 1 0% 5 0% 

Surinamese 1 0% 1 0% 1 0% 3 1% 1 0% 7 0% 

Swedish 1 0% - - - - - - - - 1 0% 

Tajiki 1 0 - - - - - - - - 1 0% 

Taiwanese - - 1 0% 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 

Thai - - 3 1% 5 2% 2 0% 2 0% 12 1% 

Togolese 2 1% 6 2% 2 1% 2 0% 2 0% 14 1% 

Turkish - - 5 1% 1 0% 2 0% 2 0% 10 1% 

Ugandan 1 0% 1 0 3 1 - - 4 1% 9 1% 

Ukrainian 18 6% 5 1% 14 5% 8 2% 10 2% 55 3% 

Uzbekistan 1 0% - - - - 2 0% 1 0% 4 0% 

Vietnamese 1 0% - - - - 3 1% 1 0% 5 0% 

(former) Yugoslavian 3 1% - - 1 0% 2 0% 5 1% 11 1% 

Zimbabwean - - - - - - - - 2 0% 2 0% 

Unknown 72 25% 21  6% 19  7% 16 4% 27 6% 155 9% 

Total 284 100% 343 100% 257 100% 403 100% 424 100% 1711 100% 

source: STV (files).1 

                                                                      
1 The information in this Table differs slightly from the figures presented in the STV’s yearly reports on 2003 and 

2005. This is because BNRM worked with STV files in which the STV had made some additional corrections. 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 256 

Table B3.6 Nationality of persons with a B-9 permit (application), 2005 

Nationality Applications Permits granted 

 N % N % 

Albanian 1 1% 1 2% 

Armenian 1 1% 1 2% 

Belarussian 2 3% 1 2% 

Brazilian 1 1% - - 

British 1 1% 1 2% 

Bulgarian 12 16% 11 18% 

Burundian 1 1% 1 2% 

Cameroonian 1 1%   

Chinese 2 3% 1 2% 

Czech 2 3% 2 3% 

Dominican 1 1% 1 2% 

Guinean 2 3% - - 

Hungarian 1 1% 1 2% 

Iranian 1 1%   

Italian 1 1% 1 2% 

Latvian   1 2% 

Moroccan 2 3% 1 2% 

Nigerian 6 8% 4 7% 

Nigerien 1 1% 1 2% 

Norwegian 1 1% 1 2% 

Polish 3 4% 3 5% 

Romanian 6 8% 6 10% 

Russian 5 7% 5 8% 

Senegalese   1 2% 

Sierra Leonese 7 9% 8 13% 

Slovakian 2 3% 2 3% 

Surinamese 2 3%   

Thai 1 1% 1 2% 

Turkish 1 1%   

Ugandan 1 1% 1 2% 

Ukrainian 4 5% 1 2% 



APPENDIX 

 257 

Uzbek 2 3% 2 3% 

Vietnamese 1 1%   

Unknown 2 3% 1 2% 

Total 77 100% 61 100% 

Table B7.5 Countries of birth of suspects, per year of registration 

Country of birth 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N N N N N N % 

Afghanistan - 1 - - 1 2 0% 

Albania 4 26 5 - - 35 4% 

Angola 1 - - - 1 2 0% 

Belgium - 2 1 2 - 5 0% 

Brazil 1 - 1 - - 2 0% 

Bulgaria 12 27 19 14 4 76 9% 

Cameroon - - 1 - - 1 0% 

Cape Verde Islands 1 - - - 2 3 0% 

China - 1 - - 2 3 0% 

Colombia - 1 - 1 1 3 0% 

Czech Republic 5 2 - 2 5 14 2% 

Democratic Republic Congo 
(former Zaire) 

- - - 1 - 1 0% 

Egypt 2 1 - - - 3 0% 

Estonia 2 1 - - - 3 0% 

France - - - 1 - 1 0% 

(Federal Republic of) Germany 1 - 1 5 1 8 1% 

Ghana 3 1 - - 1 5 0% 

Greece - 2 - - - 2 0% 

Hungary 1 1 - - 6  8 1% 

Indonesia  3 1 - 2 - 6 1% 

Iran 2 - - 2 - 4 0% 

Iraq 1 6 - 2 - 9 1% 

Ireland 1 - - - - 1 0% 

Korea - - - 1 - 1 0% 

Kuwait - - - - 1 1 0% 

Latvia 1 - - - - 1 0% 



TRAFFICKING IN HUMAN BEINGS – FIFTH REPORT OF THE NATIONAL RAPPORTEUR 

 258 

Country of birth 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 Total 

 N N N N N N % 

Lebanon 2 - - - - 2 0% 

Liberia 1 - 2 - - 3 0% 

Lithuania 2 - - - - 2 0% 

Malaysia - - 1 - - 1 0% 

Morocco 5 3 3 9 17 37 4% 

Netherlands 30 51 47 91 53 272 32% 

Netherlands Antilles 1 1 2 7 3 14 2% 

Niger 1 - - - - 1 0% 

Nigeria 3 7 5 4 - 19 2% 

Poland - 4 - 3 3 10 1% 

Portugal - - - 1 - 1 0% 

Romania 2 8 22 23 6 61 7% 

Sierra Leone - 1 1 - - 2 0% 

Somalia - 1 - - - 1 0% 

Soviet-Union 6 7 11 8 1 33 4% 

Sudan - 2 - - - 2 0% 

Suriname 4 5 10 9 6 34 4% 

Syria 1 - - - - 1 0% 

Thailand - 1 2 - 1 4 0% 

Turkey 8 26 16 24 15 89 11% 

Uganda - - - - 1 1 0% 

United Kingdom  - - - 1 - 1 0% 

United States of America - - - 1 - 1 0% 

Vietnam 1 - - - - 1 0% 

(former) Yugoslavia 22 6 3 3 4 38 5% 

Unknown - 4 3 3 - 10 1% 

Total  130 200 156 220 135 841 100% 

 





 

Colofon 
 
Reference: 
 
Dutch National Rapporteur on THB (2007). Trafficking in Human Beings - Fifth report of 
the Dutch National Rapporteur. The Hague: Bureau NRM. 
 
 
 
 
 

Bureau of the Dutch National Rapporteur onTHB 
P.O. Box 20301  

2500 EH The Hague 
The Netherlands  

 
www.bnrm.nl  

 
Tel: +31 (0)70 3704514 

Fax: +31 (0)70 4537 
 
 
 
 
Production: aolf Legal Publishers, Nijmegen/Tilburg 
Layout: Jook van der Snel 
© BNRM 2007 
















<<
  /ASCII85EncodePages false
  /AllowTransparency false
  /AutoPositionEPSFiles true
  /AutoRotatePages /PageByPage
  /Binding /Left
  /CalGrayProfile (Dot Gain 15%)
  /CalRGBProfile (Adobe RGB \0501998\051)
  /CalCMYKProfile (Euroscale Coated v2)
  /sRGBProfile (sRGB IEC61966-2.1)
  /CannotEmbedFontPolicy /Warning
  /CompatibilityLevel 1.5
  /CompressObjects /Off
  /CompressPages true
  /ConvertImagesToIndexed true
  /PassThroughJPEGImages true
  /CreateJDFFile false
  /CreateJobTicket false
  /DefaultRenderingIntent /Default
  /DetectBlends true
  /ColorConversionStrategy /UseDeviceIndependentColor
  /DoThumbnails false
  /EmbedAllFonts true
  /EmbedJobOptions true
  /DSCReportingLevel 0
  /SyntheticBoldness 1.00
  /EmitDSCWarnings false
  /EndPage -1
  /ImageMemory 1048576
  /LockDistillerParams true
  /MaxSubsetPct 100
  /Optimize false
  /OPM 1
  /ParseDSCComments true
  /ParseDSCCommentsForDocInfo true
  /PreserveCopyPage true
  /PreserveEPSInfo true
  /PreserveHalftoneInfo true
  /PreserveOPIComments false
  /PreserveOverprintSettings true
  /StartPage 1
  /SubsetFonts true
  /TransferFunctionInfo /Apply
  /UCRandBGInfo /Preserve
  /UsePrologue false
  /ColorSettingsFile (Europe Prepress Defaults)
  /AlwaysEmbed [ true
  ]
  /NeverEmbed [ true
  ]
  /AntiAliasColorImages false
  /DownsampleColorImages false
  /ColorImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /ColorImageResolution 300
  /ColorImageDepth -1
  /ColorImageDownsampleThreshold 1.50000
  /EncodeColorImages false
  /ColorImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterColorImages true
  /ColorImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /ColorACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /ColorImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000ColorImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasGrayImages false
  /DownsampleGrayImages false
  /GrayImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /GrayImageResolution 2400
  /GrayImageDepth -1
  /GrayImageDownsampleThreshold 2.00000
  /EncodeGrayImages false
  /GrayImageFilter /DCTEncode
  /AutoFilterGrayImages true
  /GrayImageAutoFilterStrategy /JPEG
  /GrayACSImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /GrayImageDict <<
    /QFactor 0.15
    /HSamples [1 1 1 1] /VSamples [1 1 1 1]
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayACSImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /JPEG2000GrayImageDict <<
    /TileWidth 256
    /TileHeight 256
    /Quality 30
  >>
  /AntiAliasMonoImages true
  /DownsampleMonoImages false
  /MonoImageDownsampleType /Bicubic
  /MonoImageResolution 2400
  /MonoImageDepth 8
  /MonoImageDownsampleThreshold 1.00000
  /EncodeMonoImages true
  /MonoImageFilter /CCITTFaxEncode
  /MonoImageDict <<
    /K -1
  >>
  /AllowPSXObjects false
  /PDFX1aCheck false
  /PDFX3Check false
  /PDFXCompliantPDFOnly false
  /PDFXNoTrimBoxError true
  /PDFXTrimBoxToMediaBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXSetBleedBoxToMediaBox true
  /PDFXBleedBoxToTrimBoxOffset [
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
    0.00000
  ]
  /PDFXOutputIntentProfile (None)
  /PDFXOutputCondition ()
  /PDFXRegistryName (http://www.color.org)
  /PDFXTrapped /Unknown

  /Description <<
    /FRA <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>
    /JPN <FEFF3053306e8a2d5b9a306f30019ad889e350cf5ea6753b50cf3092542b308000200050004400460020658766f830924f5c62103059308b3068304d306b4f7f75283057307e30593002537052376642306e753b8cea3092670059279650306b4fdd306430533068304c3067304d307e305930023053306e8a2d5b9a30674f5c62103057305f00200050004400460020658766f8306f0020004100630072006f0062006100740020304a30883073002000520065006100640065007200200035002e003000204ee5964d30678868793a3067304d307e30593002>
    /DEU <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>
    /PTB <FEFF005500740069006c0069007a006500200065007300740061007300200063006f006e00660069006700750072006100e700f5006500730020007000610072006100200063007200690061007200200064006f00630075006d0065006e0074006f0073002000500044004600200063006f006d00200075006d00610020007200650073006f006c007500e700e3006f00200064006500200069006d006100670065006d0020007300750070006500720069006f0072002000700061007200610020006f006200740065007200200075006d00610020007100750061006c0069006400610064006500200064006500200069006d0070007200650073007300e3006f0020006d0065006c0068006f0072002e0020004f007300200064006f00630075006d0065006e0074006f0073002000500044004600200070006f00640065006d0020007300650072002000610062006500720074006f007300200063006f006d0020006f0020004100630072006f006200610074002c002000520065006100640065007200200035002e0030002000650020007300750070006500720069006f0072002e>
    /DAN <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>
    /NLD <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>
    /ESP <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>
    /SUO <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>
    /ITA <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>
    /NOR <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>
    /SVE <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>
    /ENU <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>
  >>
>> setdistillerparams
<<
  /HWResolution [2400 2400]
  /PageSize [612.000 792.000]
>> setpagedevice

