












































 

 

 

 

European sexual exploitation 
 Offenders come from Central and Eastern Europe, are older 

than those involved in ‘Domestic small-scale sexual                     

exploitation’, are also sometimes female 

 Victims are from Central and Eastern Europe 

 2 or 3 offenders and 3 or 4 victims in each human trafficking 
situation 

 Sometimes involves a situation in which the offender feigns a 

loving relationship with the victim 

  Sexual exploitation Exploitation outside the sex industry 

Gender Almost always female (93%) Roughly half are female (49%) 

Age The vast majority are below the age of 31 

(83%) 

Roughly half are below the age of 31  

(52%) 

Region of origin Frequently from Africa (35%) and the 

Netherlands (32%) 

Frequently from the member states that 

joined the EU in 2004 or 2007 (56%) and 

Asia (17%) 

Reporting of offences 42% reported the offence  31% reported the offence 

 

Underexposure of underage victims  
 

In 2011, 16% (=195) of all reported victims 

were underage victims. There are indications 

that the proportion of underage victims is far 

larger, because some agencies do not report 

underage victims and because at present 

only the victim’s age at the time of                      

notification is registered rather than the age 

at the time he or she first became a victim. Of 

the underage victims that are currently           

reported, 59% have Dutch nationality. More 

than a quarter (27%) are nationals of an          

African country. 

Victims 

The characteristics of victims of sexual and of other forms of exploitation differ in a number of im-

portant respects. Victims of sexual exploitation are more often female, are younger, and are more often 

from Africa and the Netherlands and less often from Central and Eastern Europe. Victims of sexual 

exploitation are also more willing to report the offence than victims of other forms of exploitation. 

Non-Dutch victims in the B9 regulation 
 

Because the B9 regulation involves cooperation with 

the police, it is an important instrument in investiga-

tions. For victims, it provides regular residence sta-

tus and access to facilities (such as shelter). 

 

398 B9 permits granted in 2011 
 

A B9 residence permit is occasionally not granted 

because of a victim’s criminal antecedents, for ex-

ample a record for shoplifting. However, a B9 resi-

dence permit should be granted to every victim, re-

gardless of criminal antecedents. 

Increase in registered victims from 716 in 2007 to 1,222 in 2011 
This does not necessarily mean that there was an actual increase in the number of victims.  

More likely the identification/registration of victims has improved 

Offenders 

 

220 prosecutions a year 
 

70% of suspects are charged with human traf-

ficking; the cases against the remainder are of-

ten dismissed (because of a lack of evidence, for 

example). More than half (56%) of those who 

come before the courts are convicted of human 

trafficking. In most cases (91%), they are given 

an unconditional prison sentence, the length of 

which almost never exceeds four years (in only 

7%). 

Who are the suspects?  
 Usually male (more than 80%) 

 Average age approximately 30 (occasionally minors or over the age of 50)  

 Top 8 countries of birth: the Netherlands, Bulgaria, Hungary, Turkey, Romania, Morocco, Surinam and the 
former Netherlands Antilles (jointly accounting for 75% of all suspects in 2007-2011).  

 

On average, more than a third (37%) of the suspects are born in the Netherlands. The proportion born in the 

three Central and Eastern European countries almost doubled between 2007 and 2011, from 14% to 27%. 

The opposite applies for the group of countries comprising Turkey, Morocco, Surinam and the former Neth-

erlands Antilles: the proportion of suspects born in these countries fell by half, from 23% to 11%, in that 

period. Far more suspects in this latter category live in the Netherlands than in their own country of birth. 

The suspects born in the Netherlands are younger (48% are not older than 25) than suspects in the other 

two categories (28-29% are not older than 25). 

Different roles 
 

Offenders in cases of sexual exploitation often 

perform a number of different roles in the           

human trafficking process. They can be                 

recruiters, transporters (who bring victims 

across a border), pimps, bodyguards (who             

control victims), operators of sex businesses 

and drivers (who bring the victims to their place 

of work). The role of pimp is performed least 

often by females, and pimps have criminal            

antecedents more often than other offenders. 

Bodyguards are younger than other offenders, 

which could imply that the tasks associated with 

the role of bodyguard are delegated mainly to 

‘novice human traffickers’. In contrast, operators 

of sex businesses are the oldest group of             

offenders, which might imply that the role of 

operator of a sex business is reserved mainly for 

the more ‘experienced human traffickers’. 

Domestic small-scale                  

sexual exploitation 
 Offenders come mainly from the                      

Netherlands, Turkey, Morocco, Surinam or 

the former Netherlands Antilles, are the 

youngest, are almost always male. 

 Victims are from the Netherlands 

 1 or 2 offenders and victims in each          

human trafficking situation 

 Regularly involves a situation in which the 
offender feigns a loving relationship with 

the victim 

Three suspects born in Bulgaria exploit three victims in the                

licensed and unlicensed prostitution sector (window prostitution, 

brothels, sex clubs and escort agencies). They move the victims 

around in the Netherlands and between the Netherlands,               

Germany and Switzerland. The suspects are a man aged 28 

(recruiter and pimp), a woman aged 29 (recruiter and pimp) and 

a man aged 23 (pimp). The victims are a girl from Bulgaria aged 

17, a woman from Bulgaria aged 29 and a woman from Hungary 

aged 31. One of the victims is in a loving relationship feigned by 

one of the suspects. The victims’ passports and the money they 

earn are confiscated by the suspects and they and their families 

are subjected to threats or actual violence, including sexual          

violence. 

International large-scale exploitation  

outside the sex industry 
 Offenders come from Asia and the Netherlands, are the oldest, are also             

frequently female 

 Victims come from Asia 

 A large number of offenders (around 4) and victims (ranging from 3 to 100) in 

each human trafficking situation 

 Never involves a feigned loving relationship between offenders and victims      

The parents of a 25-year old Dutch woman 

go to the police. Their daughter is living 

with her ‘boyfriend’, a Dutch man, aged 

around 30, originally from Morocco, with 

criminal antecedents. The man has                 

persuaded their daughter wo work as a 

prostitute in order to pay off a debt he has 

incurred. He earns some undeclared              

income as a painter and acts as her pimp 

when she works for him in a licensed sex 

club.  

More than ten Indonesians, who were recruited in their home country on the           

basis of false promises and who are in the Netherlands illegally, are encountered 

living in a pest-ridden house that is also a fire hazard. In this house, under appal-

ling conditions, they prepare Indonesian food products (such as prawn crackers). 

Four men from Indonesia aged between 26 and 61 report the crime. There are 

six suspects who have been engaged in people smuggling and money laundering 

in addition to human trafficking. They are a Dutch man aged 45 (receiving          

benefits); his partner, a Dutch woman aged 37 (who has her own business); his 

mistress, an Indonesian woman aged 29 (who works in the home care sector and 

who arranged the victims’ journey to the Netherlands); his daughter, a Dutch 

woman aged 25 (who has an administrative job and who provided accommoda-

tion for the victims); his son-in-law, a Dutch man aged 38 from Surinam, (who is a 

civil servant and who also provided accommodation for the victims); and an          

Indonesian man aged 38, who is the principal suspect’s foreman. 

 
 

Human trafficking is a serious, frequently  

transnational, problem that is often hidden, 

but effective policies cannot be implemented 

in the dark. To address the problem of human 

trafficking, we have to turn on the light: Where 

does it occur? How large is the problem? What 

form does it take? 

 

My key message is therefore:  

 

To tackle human trafficking effectively, it 

must be made visible. Human trafficking that 

is hidden must be revealed - and once revealed, it must be better 

registered.  

 

In that way, we can shed a little more light on the hidden face of 

human trafficking. 

 

Corinne Dettmeijer-Vermeulen 

3 types of human trafficking structures 
Source: Chapter 5: Investigation of suspects in the Netherlands, BNRM police investigation study 2009  

Profiles of victims 

Source: Chapter 3: Registered victims in the Netherlands, CoMensha 2007-2011  

Source: Chapter 4: Victims and the B9 regulation in the 

Netherlands, IND 2007-2011 

Top eight countries of birth of suspects 

Source: Chapter 5: Investigation of suspects in the 

Netherlands, BNRM police investigations study 2009 

Source: Chapter 6: Prosecution and trial of suspects in the Netherlands, PPS data 2007-2011 

A noteworthy point is the small number of suspects born in Africa (apart from Morocco) that appear in the 

data on prosecutions. This is surprising because offenders and victims often come from the same region 

and Africa is the largest region of origin of registered victims of sexual exploitation. 

Trafficking in Human Beings:  

Visible and Invisible 

Turkey, Morocco, Surinam, 

Netherlands Antilles 
 

Bulgaria, Hungary,  

Romania 
 

Netherlands 

Year 


