











































1 
 

Speech by Corinne Dettmeijer,  

Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings and Sexual Violence against Children 

 

On the occasion of the Interaction Between Legal Systems Conference “Room for reflection” 

Leiden University, 22 January 2015, Leiden, the Netherlands 

 

Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 

Today, I would like to tell you the tale of a thirteen year old girl.  

A thirteen year old girl from India who thought of making a new future for herself in the Netherlands. 

A thirteen year old girl who dreamed of a new country, new opportunities, with a sound education and 

perhaps, at some point, a good job. But it was not be. The story I'm going to tell you today is about 

how she actually lived, here in the Netherlands. A life of years of exploitation and, after that, prison. 

The story is about S..  

I'm not telling you any old story. First of all, I feel very strongly about it. But I've also got a very good 

reason for telling you the story right here during a conference on the interaction between legal 

systems. Because, entirely unintentional though it may be, the life story of S. illustrates that the 

interaction between legal systems is a real issue; that its importance cannot just be understood from a 

theoretical and academic angle because it can have a direct impact on people's lives.  

 

I notice that the interaction between legal systems is often studied from an empirical angle: where can 

similarities be identified between different legal domains?  How do the different areas influence each 

other, for example through the concepts they use? The story of S. demonstrates that interaction is not 

just a matter for empirical study but that in itself interaction is a goal worth achieving.  

That interaction is sometimes necessary to be able to take just decisions, however high flown that may 

perhaps sound.  

* 

 

I will tell the tale chronologically, touching on several legal domains:   international and European 

law, and three national legal jurisdictions to which S. in various capacities was subject.  

First, criminal law in which S. featured as witness-informant, victim and suspect.  

Then immigration law from the perspective of which, during a period lasting almost a decade, several 

decisions were taken regarding S. as an alien. And finally, labour law, where S. had the role of 

plaintiff.  

* 

But let me begin at the beginning. That is 1999, when the father of S. in India reached agreement with 

a well-to-do Indian family in The Hague that his daughter would come to live with them. The deal was 

that S. would earn 2000 rupees for regular work in the house of the two expats, preparing meals and 

taking the children to school.  

The two expats also engaged two more housekeepers, also from India, who, together with their five 

month old baby Mehak, came to live in the house on Copernicusstraat in The Hague.  

But her tasks were not confined to regular work. S. was expected to work every day, not during 

normal hours but often at five in the morning, when breakfast had to be prepared, until ten at night. In 

the court case brought against the expats the final verdict of the Appeal Court of The Hague was that 

S. had been forced to work excessively long days during which she was expected to be available at 

any given moment. Altogether S. was forced to live in these conditions for more than six years. No 



2 
 

wonder that the Appeal Court reached a conviction. Both expats were sentenced to 6 to 8 years in 

prison, but managed to escape, probably to India, when their pre-trail detention was waived. The Court 

found that the charges of 'servitude' had been proven, a category of (domestic) bondage that only 

distinguishes itself from the classic form of slavery through the absence of a formal 'certificate of 

ownership'. 

* 

But there is yet another component to the story of S.. The component that links this tale to the theme 

of today's conference. One of the expats happened to think that the baby of the other housekeepers was 

bewitched because her mother had allegedly killed a snake in India. One of the expats was convinced 

that drastic measures were required to cast out the baby's evil spirits. She instructed the baby's parents 

and S. on several occasions to maltreat the baby. In her brief life the baby was repeatedly beaten. 

Things went badly wrong at a certain point when the expat again forced S. and Mehak's mother to hit 

Mehak. Mehak died as a result of the ill treatment.   

S. was prosecuted for her part in the maltreatment of baby Mehak. In the end she was sentenced by the 

Appeal Court to five years for manslaughter, the maltreatment prior to the day of death  

and perjury because initially, under pressure from the expats, she failed to tell the truth.  

* 

We are dealing here with a complex situation, that much is clear. There is S. the victim, who as 

domestic slave was abused for years, and for which her exploiters were convicted. And there is the 

conviction of S. herself for maltreating baby Mehak. Two criminal facts which have had an immense 

impact on the decisions taken about S. at a later stage in different legal domains.  

Before I go on to talk about these it is a good idea to look briefly at the international and European 

legal context within which policy in the Netherlands regarding victims is required to take shape.  

The positive obligations of the government of the Netherlands with respect to the victims of human 

trafficking are after all determined to a large extent by this supranational framework.  

 The framework stipulates in the first instance that the victims of human trafficking are entitled 
to legal residence and protection, such as help and shelter if they cooperate with the criminal 

investigation into their human traffickers. This applies in the Netherlands even if the human 

trafficking victim has a conviction. The conviction in other words does not detract from the 

fact that the person in question is a victim.  

 

 What is also relevant here is the principle of non-prosecution and non-punishment as 
contained in the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human 

Beings and in the EU Directive on trafficking in human beings. The principles prescribe that 

states must have the opportunity to refrain from prosecuting or punishing victims of human 

trafficking if the victims were forced to commit criminal acts.  

We are talking here of 'causation'. To what extent were the offences related to the exploitation 

and human trafficking? And if they were, should we then prosecute victims? International and 

European law tend to say no. The dogma is that the non-punishment principle constitutes the 

corner stone of the protection of victims.  

So it is interesting to see whether S. in the proceedings that followed her conviction was properly and 

sufficiently protected bearing in mind this framework. The decisions taken about her in various legal 

domains interacted in different ways. I'll pause to consider how this interaction took place for each 

decision. What's more, I'll look to see to what extent that interaction made a positive contribution to 

the protection of S..  

* 



3 
 

First of all, let's take the notion in international and European law of non-prosecution and non-

punishment. As we already established the question is one of causation: were the criminal offences 

sufficiently related to the human trafficking? 

 

The Appeal Court interpreted the principle in such a way that there had to be a connection between the 

work that S. performed and the maltreatment inflicted upon Mehak. Since that connection proved 

insufficient resort to the principle of non-punishment was rejected.  

 

The wrong interpretation had a great drawback: by requiring there to be a connection with the work no 

attention was paid to the context of subjugation or domestic bondage that prevailed in the 

Copernicusstraat, or to the utterly dependent situation in which S. found herself vis à vis her 

exploiters. While, in fact, it is precisely this underlying context that can, for the most part, provide an 

explanation for the crime.  

 

The conviction of S. had major repercussions because, as the first domino to fall, it proved to have an 

immense impact on the outcome of other proceedings in other legal domains. Thus the conviction was 

the immediate grounds for S. being declared an undesirable alien. Given the conviction, it was argued 

that she posed a threat to public order and was therefore summonsed to leave the country immediately 

after having served her sentence. The conviction served to ensure that S. was not granted the 

protection due to victims of human trafficking by virtue of immigration legislation which, as we saw, 

all human trafficking victims are entitled to. She had thus no right to temporary residence and 

protection. 

We see here how much influence a decision taken in one legal domain has on the substance of a 

decision in another legal domain. Criminal law immediately affected the underlying arguments and the 

decisions that were taken in immigration law. Strictly speaking, one would say there is interaction 

here. In terms of the dictionary definition though, which emphasises the reciprocal nature of the 

process, the mutual influence of the one on the other, interaction was totally lacking in this case. The 

very fact that there was no reciprocal interaction led to a decision being taken that took no account of 

the lamentable circumstances that S. found herself in as a victim of human trafficking.  

* 

Something else unusual also occurs in immigration law in the Netherlands which we could perhaps 

call 'internal interaction', an interaction between proceedings that take place within a single legal 

domain. In this case though we are talking about a lack of internal interaction.  

Even within a single legal area, and the modalities which are part of that, it sometimes proves difficult 

to offer victims the  protection they need. The reason for this is that proceedings are based on different 

objectives and points of departure.  

We can see that in the case of S. her being declared an undesirable alien directly affects her request for 

asylum which is rejected. Moreover the arguments for the rejection also stated that no credence could 

be given to the danger S. would be in if she returned to India. S. had asserted that she would be at risk 

because she was afraid that once in India she would again fall into the hands of the escaped expats. 

Here we now see that something strange happens. Let me explain  

We had established that S. was entitled to residence by law during the investigation of her exploiters, 

but that it was never granted.  This special human trafficking procedure has another option which is 

'continued residence', that provides for a long-term or permanent legal residence in the Netherlands if 

the human traffickers have been convicted and the victim has cooperated in their conviction. This was 

the case with S.. The statements she ultimately made proved crucial to a conviction. The reasoning 

behind this procedure is that victims should be protected against the risk they run of falling into the 

hands of the traffickers once they return to their country of origin. This fact has been accepted as given 

and does not need to be proved by the victim: the law takes the view that the danger unquestionably 

exists.  



4 
 

However, now that S. was not subject to the regime of human trafficking procedures, the regular 

immigration rules applied. That entailed that it had to be established separately whether there was a 

real chance of her being at risk on returning to India. The onus of proof rested with the alien. The state 

failed to be convinced by the arguments S. put forward. Worse still, the Immigration and 

Naturalisation Service, (IND) lent 'no credence whatsoever' to the fear of reprisals. Her statements 

were dismissed as minimal and unclear.  

Here we have a strange discrepancy between the points of departure in two different proceedings 

within a single legal domain. The danger of returning is considered present by definition in the one 

proceedings while in the other the alien herself has to prove that that is the case. We see now how 

important it is for the authorities to be properly aware of each other's decisions. How crucial it is for 

information to be shared so that the context of the person about whom the decision is being taken 

clearly emerges, and balanced decisions can be taken. In a nutshell: interaction is not only required 

between legal domains it is also necessary within legal domains.  

* 

That brings me to the next interaction. Here, too, it would be better to speak of lack of interaction. S. 

becomes the plaintiff in a civil law action brought for the back pay that she never received.  

If work has an international component there is always the question of which jurisdiction applies. 

European law stipulates that in principle the law that applies is that of the country where the work is 

normally performed, unless it becomes apparent from the overall circumstances that the contract of 

employment is more closely tied to another country (the exception clause). The intention is to protect 

workers and ensure that the level-playing-field principle applies: conditions of employment should not 

vary too much in one and the same territory.   

 

De sub-district court in first instance set this aside. S. was almost never out of the house during the 

more than six years that she worked in the Netherlands. Her contact with the world at large was kept to 

a minimum through the control her exploiters had over her.  

 

The work she performed in the house on Copernicusstraat was carried out in an entirely Indian 

environment or put another way; the house in The Hague could just as well have been in New Delhi. 

The court found that S. must be compensated. On the basis of the agreed 50 euro per month and 

assuming an 80-hour working week she was entitled, according to the court, to 2020 euro for a period 

of two years.  

Again something interesting happens here. Criminal law proceeds from an entirely different premise. 

Of course, the decision as to whether exploitation had occurred, and therefore under what conditions 

criminal liability could be assumed, is a totally different matter to the liability to pay wages. And yet it 

is strange that in criminal law no value whatsoever is attached to the Indian, Chinese, Bulgarian 

etcetera... context in which work is performed. Going even further, the Supreme Court found on 

several occasions that in assessing exploitation solely Dutch standards should apply.  

Earlier we saw that the criminal conviction of S. had a major impact on the decisions based on 

immigration legislation. Now we see how the premises of labour law differ from those of criminal law. 

In other words how autonomously labour law functions. Here, too, there is a need for a more 

reciprocal influence, for a link or interaction between these ostensibly so separate legal domains so 

that a certain coherence can be achieved to exclude any strange discrepancies between the various 

decisions. I take the view that in this case the exception clause should not have been applied and a 

good argument for this could have been derived for one thing from the criminal law approach I 

referred to earlier.  

At appeal, by the way, things went well with the wages because the court considered that the 

exception clause was not applicable and that compensation had to be paid in accordance with Dutch 



5 
 

standards. But that exception nevertheless continues to exist and conflicts with the premises of 

criminal law in cases that arise.  

* 

Let me close by recapitulating. I've explained how many decisions had been taken regarding S. in 

several legal domains. I also demonstrated how those decisions affected one another and were 

sometimes backed by arguments from different points of view.  

1. First of all there was the power of criminal law: the conviction that resulted in her being 
declared an undesirable alien and her application for asylum being automatically rejected. We 

concluded that this was for the victim an unpleasant one-sided interaction. A more 

autonomous deliberation under the terms of immigration law, separate from criminal law, 

would have been desirable here and would have done greater justice to the human trafficking 

context in which S. had spent more than six years.  

2. At the same time in the interaction between criminal law and labour law we see a greater need 
for coherence, in which, because of the notion of protection, criminal law ought to take 

precedence. In that case no significance is attached to the Indian setting in which the work was 

carried out and the equality principle prevails: equal pay for equal work in the same territory. 

Here labour law can learn something from criminal law.   

3. Third, we have also seen that in the tale of S. there were different proceedings within a single 
legal domain that were based on contradictory premises. It would appear that sometimes there 

is a lack of interaction between legal domains as well as a lack of interaction within legal 

domains. The key word here is information: decision-makers in the one proceedings must be 

aware of the background to a case. Balanced decisions can only be taken once this interaction 

has been achieved.  

The main thing to emerge here is that the protection of victims of human trafficking is a major 

challenge that is jeopardised by the subdivision into legal domains that we ourselves have created. No 

one denies the importance of those legal domains, or of the distinctions that lawyers over the years 

have created. They make for clarity in theory and practice and facilitate understanding of the workings 

of the legal system as a whole.  

But these human constructs should never stand in the way of the effective protection of victims. In 

other words products conceived by man may not result in inhumane products. We have seen that if we 

are to achieve this we must continually seek the right balance. And a recurring issue is the need for the 

legal domains to be linked. But besides this link there must also be genuine interaction, by which I 

mean, real mutual influence on a recurring basis. We have an obligation to do this in the interests of 

victims. The story of S. should continually serve as a challenge to us.  

Thank you. 


