











































1/3 
 

Speech by Corinne Dettmeijer, 

Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings  

and Sexual Violence against Children 

 

On the occasion of the Anne Frank Award for Dignity and Tolerance dinner 

Residence of Dutch Ambassador Schuwe, 24 February 2016, Washington DC, United States 

 

 

My field of expertise is human trafficking. And where does that relate to the subject of the 

Anne Frank award? I think that keywords are vulnerabilities, freedom and human dignity. 

Tyldum coined it as follows: 

 

I have come to understand trafficking as systematic exploitation of vulnerabilities. 

However, these vulnerabilities create an arena that makes exploitation possible, and 

one that traffickers can manipulate to keep their victims in a situation where continued 

exploitation is possible. 

 

Tyldum 

 

Henriette Siliadin came to Paris from Togo when she was 15 years old. For years she was 

exploited by a family with four small children. She worked twenty hours a day, seven days a 

week and was barely fed on a monthly ration of a chicken and a packet of cornflakes. The 

family’s leftovers were thrown away rather than being shared with her. Fear and threats held 

her captive. It was her story that resulted in the first judgment of the European Court of 

Human Rights on human trafficking and changed the way people think about the protection of 

human dignity. 

 

You don’t need to be in chains to be a victim of modern slavery. 

 

Human dignity should be self-evident, for everyone. A society where the dignity of some of 

the people, from the Netherlands or from other countries, is systematically abused is not my 

society. Exploitation, the outcome of human trafficking, is humiliating for the victims who are 

often vulnerable, but also humiliating for us, as a society.  

 



2/3 
 

Human trafficking comes in various guises and is pervasive. Nevertheless it comes down to a 

single concept: vulnerability. All human beings are entitled to their vulnerabilities without 

fear of being abused by others. However, not every person is vulnerable to becoming a victim. 

Discovering the factors that make some individuals more vulnerable than others has become 

more urgent than ever. Human trafficking not only damages the victims themselves but also 

affects their children, parents and loved ones. How many people are actually caught in this 

web? 

And we are not only talking about individual vulnerability, for certain sectors may be 

vulnerable as well. The most obvious one is prostitution. Mapping the specific weaknesses in 

this sector remains a complex exercise involving fine distinctions, moral issues and regard for 

individual circumstances. Such complexity obliges us to take measures for the sector as a 

whole and to protect specifically the men and women who work in the sex industry. 

 

But society as a whole is also vulnerable. Human traffickers take advantage of the trust 

offered by our open society. They abuse local authority services, profit from the freedom to 

rent premises and use banks to launder criminal gains. By doing so they undermine all the 

hard-won assets of our society, values that are worth protecting. 

 

Society  is  at  its  most  vulnerable  when  it  is  incapable  of  recognizing  cases  of  human 

trafficking. That applies to prostitution, labour exploitation but also to new forms of human 

trafficking. In recent years we have seen parents inducing their children to perform criminal 

acts like stealing and burglary. Are these children criminals? Or is more going on here? If we 

turn a blind eye to what we plainly see, we are failing these children. Instead of offering 

protection, we sometimes prosecute and punish and this conveys the wrong message. 

 

Global is local. What happens anywhere in the world may have a direct impact in other 

parts and confronts us a l l  with new challenges. The numerous areas of conflict in the 

world are forcing millions to flee. Adults and children are seeking refuge in Europe in great 

numbers. Among them are child brides from Syria who I see from the perspective of human 

trafficking. And that gives me cause for concern. These young girls like all children in our 

country must be able to feel the liberating force of our values. They must not disappear behind 

closed doors but must be allowed to grow up in the heart of our society. 

 

Human trafficking has no frontiers. Exploitation elsewhere manifests itself in the products we 



3/3 
 

can buy here. Clothing made by children’s hands in India, chocolate from the cocoa plucked 

by children in Cameroon. By taking responsibility for what happens in the entire production 

chain we can help combat exploitation beyond our own borders. 

 

Human trafficking permeates the fabric of our society. Often unnoticed. It’s in the food we 

eat, the clothes we wear, in the products we consume. Every act of human trafficking taints 

our society’s underlying values of freedom, self-determination and justice. Resisting that 

assault by eliminating modern slavery requires an unflagging effort on the part of all 

governments but also on the part of society as a whole. And for that we need a society that is 

increasingly more aware of human trafficking and as a result more resilient to it. 

 

The right to human dignity is not self-evident. It has to be repeatedly fought for. The battle 

against  human  trafficking  is  an  important  part  of  that  fight.  Obviously,  taking  on  this 

challenge will be fraught with difficulties but they have to be faced and the struggle is 

worthwhile. We have to stand up for our values and demonstrate what our dignity is worth. 

 

On an international level we have the legal instruments to fight human trafficking. In most 

countries all over the world the international conventions have been signed and ratified, in 

many countries the legal provisions are in place. But that’s not enough. 

 

I was very touched by Henriette’s story. Despite the inhumane way in which she was treated it 

was her deep human feeling that kept her going and made her resilient. “The love from and 

for the children I was looking after.” That came very close. Almost tangible. 

 

Henriette’s story demonstrates that chains need not be made of steel but can also be created 

by fear and threats. The ignorance and indifference of bystanders keep these chains intact. 

It is up to us to break them.  


