









































Microsoft Word - Speech by the National Rapporteur, NCCTHB, Sofia, 13 August 2012.doc


 1

Speech by the  

National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings  

and Sexual Violence against Children in The Netherlands 

Ms. Corinne DETTMEIJER-VERMEULEN 

 

At the occasion of the press conference on the project 

“Improvement of National Anti-Traffic Policy through Transfer of Know-How, 

Experience and Good Practices” 

13 August 2012 in Sofia, Bulgaria 

 
 

Your Excellency,  
Deputy Prime Minister Tsvetanov,  
 
Your Excellency,  
Ambassador Van Kesteren 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 
It is an honour for me to speak to you today. I remember the last time I was here, in December 
2010, for the closing conference of a successful Dutch-Bulgarian project on combating 
trafficking in human beings. Many of the people present then are here again today, which in 
my view bears witness of Bulgarian determination to fight trafficking in human beings. What 
has stuck with me very vividly is the account of Olga, a victim of trafficking who had been 
forced to work as a prostitute in the city of Groningen in The Netherlands. She showed 
courage by sharing with us her traumatic experiences and her disappointment about how she 
had been deceived by her trafficker. I was impressed by her strength and moved by her story. 
I think all of us were.  
 
I was pleased to hear about Olga’s positive experiences with cross-border cooperation 
between Dutch and Bulgarian police. Cooperation is key to combating trafficking in human 
beings. Not only between, but also within countries. That is one of the things that will become 
clear from this cross-border cooperation between the National Commission and my office, 
this project on data sharing and analysis within a single country. 
 
As the Dutch National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings my task is to monitor the 
effectiveness of the counter-trafficking policy pursued by the Dutch government. Monitoring 
the effectiveness of this fight is a way of holding up a mirror. I do so by collecting 
information and reporting to the Dutch government. Making recommendations based on 
scientific research is an important part of that, and allows for the development of research-
based policy. 



 2

  
One of the key elements in a successful counter-trafficking strategy is knowledge. Knowledge 
is power. Power as a dynamic concept to approach and tackle the problem efficiently, to 
improve the fight against it, in policy making and in the application of the law (or other 
regulations) in practice. Without knowledge on the scale and nature of THB, how do know 
what our policy should be targeting? It is widely recognised that knowledge about THB is a 
precondition for addressing the phenomenon in an adequate manner. 
 
Knowledge on THB should be a combination of qualitative and quantitative information. 
After all, statistics are worth little if you do not understand what is behind them. Statistics 
need to be interpreted. Similarly, qualitative information may be perceived as assumptions if 
not supported by data. The first aspect of my work is to gather both types of information, from 
all possible individuals and organisations that deal with the trafficking issue – both state and 
non-governmental. This regards information on the nature and the scale, on perpetrators, on 
modus operandi, on victims, but also on more general themes like prevention, legislation, 
governmental policy and important developments in these fields, on the national and 
international level.  
 
It is clear that is very difficult to collect reliable information. There are various reasons which 
complicate the gathering of data: Firstly, exploitation partly occurs in hidden sectors such as 
the (unlicensed) sex industry, the informal economy and behind closed doors in private 
households, making it difficult to detect; Secondly, not all victims are like Olga. Many 
victims, including victims of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry, are reluctant 
to tell of their experiences. For these reasons, and also because exploitation does not, 
generally speaking, cause any visible disturbance of public order, cases remain undiscovered. 
It is unknown how large this ‘dark number’ is – but it is likely to be considerable. 
  
A significant question is what type of research is needed. It is often said that studies in 
relation to a single country provide too limited a picture. This is true in relation to specific 
aspects of what is frequently a cross-border offence, such as human trafficking routes or 
obtaining a picture of the situation for victims who have returned to their countries of origin. 
However, for (national) policy purposes, it is valuable and even essential to collect 
information specific to a particular country. This type of information is also indispensable for 
clarifying the meaning of the results from large-scale international comparative studies.  
 
My position is an independent one.  
That makes all the difference.  
 
It makes a difference in terms of access to information and data. In fact, to some organizations 
that independent position is the decisive factor for agreeing to share information with my 
Bureau – and sometimes exclusively with my Bureau. Partners include the public prosecution 
service, the immigration service and organizations responsible for the shelter of victims, 
NGO’s. 
 
What does “access to data” mean? Ideally, it would mean that perfectly organized, digital data 
sets are shared confidentially through a securitized transfer, after which we can start analyzing 
the data using a statistical analysis programme. Confidentiality is of paramount importance, as 
data sets contain many personal details. My researchers often travel to organizations to collect 
the data sets and store them on securitized data carriers. Those data sets are not perfectly 
organized. In reality they are often cluttered, and contain duplications and errors. The 



 3

information has to be organized, anonymized and refined – a labour intensive job that is partly 
done by hand. It takes various rounds of adjusting before data is ready to be analyzed, and 
subsequently, interpreted. Often, “access to data” means gaining access to stacks of paper 
files from which information has to be selected, processed and analyzed – an equally labour 
intensive job. The National and Local Commissions for Trafficking in Human Beings will 
learn all about this process from our data specialist Ieke de Vries, who is excited to share her 
knowledge and experiences on data analysis.  
 
The data of stakeholders has allowed me to publish reports containing facts and figures on 
many aspects of trafficking. They include not only victim and perpetrator characteristics, but 
also prosecution and conviction ratios, trends in the duration of prison sentences and the 
amount of compensation paid to victims of trafficking. In the Netherlands, my data is 
regularly the subject of Parliamentary debates. It serves to improve counter-trafficking 
policies. The power of data demonstrated once more recently, when one of my studies forced 
the Dutch Minister of Immigration, Integration and Asylum to reconsider his intended policy, 
which lacked data supporting his assumptions about the expected results. His intended policy 
would, in my view, have impacted on the protection of foreign victims of trafficking to such 
an extent that it would have been in breach of European legislation.  
 
Knowledge and data are powerful. We are looking forward to sharing our good practices, 
know-how, and experiences on developing and using this powerful tool.  
 


