









































Microsoft Word - Toespraak Nationaal Rapporteur ter gelegenheid van de Conferentie over Arbeidsuitbuiting in het kader van het 


1 
 

 
Toespraak van de Nationaal Rapporteur Mensenhandel en Seksueel Geweld tegen Kinderen 

 
mr. C.E. Dettmeijer-Vermeulen 

 
Ter gelegenheid van de Conferentie over Arbeidsuitbuiting 

in  het kader van het Nederlands voorzitterschap van de Raad van de EU 
 

Amsterdam, 18 januari 2016  

- Concept –  

(Onderstaande tekst kan afwijken van uitgesproken tekst) 

 

 

Looking at labour exploitation through a kaleidoscope; a plea for a multi-perspective 

approach 

Can you remember the first time you looked through a kaleidoscope? How amazed you were at 

the multiple colours and shapes that flashed by?  

That’s the image that springs to mind when I look back over the past years. Years during which 

labour exploitation has become a criminal offence in all member states, when general awareness 

of labour exploitation has grown, and more and more organisations have come involved. Today 

marks the culmination as labour exploitation becomes a priority of the Dutch presidency.  

Looking at the audience today, also reminds me of the image of the kaleidoscope, so many 

different and diverse players, representing numerous enforcement bodies, NGOs and private 

parties. That image reflects for me just how many different manifestations there are of labour 

exploitation.  

But even more than the diversity of the kinds of labour exploitation, the image of the 

kaleidoscope represents all the many viewpoints that can be brought to bear on the phenomenon. 

The fact is that we often look at labour exploitation through an overly narrow lens. As if we had 

to choose. As if the choice also determines what action to take.  

We see labour exploitation solely as a criminal act.  

Or exclusively as a distortion on the labour market. 

Or we see it as a violation of human rights.   



2 
 

But choice does not come into the matter. We need to widen our view, it’s time for a 

kaleidoscopic approach, to both the phenomenon and the way we tackle it.  

And what exactly do I mean by this? Well, in the past few years I have seen different angles of 

approach put forward to tackle labour exploitation. There are five that I want to discuss with you 

today:  

They concentrate on: 

criminal law; 

the victim; 

labour migration; 

the labour market; 

and lastly conflict zones. 

It is from these angles that attempts have been made in recent years to better understand the 

phenomenon of labour exploitation. Given the many shapes the phenomenon takes, none of these 

perspectives alone can fully cope with the unyielding nature of the real situation on the ground. 

Each of them simply highlights a single facet of labour exploitation and the accompanying steps 

to tackle it. The angles adopted are inextricably connected with what is known in the social 

sciences as ‘framing’: they select an element of the reality but fail to grasp the whole picture. To 

really get to grips with labour exploitation it remains important to look beyond a particular 

perspective or in any event to work on integrating them.  

Let me begin with the criminal law angle. From this perspective labour exploitation is primarily 

seen as a crime. Here, criminal law is the defining parameter, along with those who play a role in 

the criminal law chain; law enforcement, judges. The focus is on criminalisation, on the legal 

concept of labour exploitation, on the components that denote its existence and the penalty that 

such behaviour incurs. The emphasis on criminalisation also entails the actions of the parties 

involved. If criminalisation is to be effective enforcement is needed. So the focus is also on the 

measures needed to effectively press charges and penalise the suspects.  

In due course, more attention came to be paid to the second angle, that gave priority to the victim. 

The European Directive, for instance, places the victim and its protection in the centre of the 

frame. Measures are being taken to guarantee a legal status. To build up procedures that enable 



3 
 

victims to get compensation. And to adjust legal systems so that they can assure a victim that the 

non punishment clause is taken into account where appropriate.  

A third approach is that from the viewpoint of labour migration. Here human trafficking is 

viewed as a phenomenon that has evolved in the wake of complex developments like 

globalisation and technology advances. Push and pull factors play a central role here; what is the 

reason for the migration of people from A to B? Is there a connection between measures that are 

taken as part of tackling human trafficking and policy that focuses on regulating migration?  

Then there is the viewpoint that looks at matters from the angle of the labour market, looking 

for more structural unfairness that may occur in a job market. The main issue here is to spot such 

inequalities and strengthen the position of workers. Options that spring to mind are strengthening 

their negotiating position and preventing workers being paid in cash. In other words the labour 

market view explores all legislation and policies in the field of work and income and primarily 

falls in the remit of labour departments. Where are the weak points and how can they be 

eliminated by legislation and policy? Obviously enforcement agencies have a role to play here as 

well. The Labour Inspectorate must become a permanent partner when it comes to labour 

exploitation.  

Lastly, we have the conflict angle that looks at the links between conflicts that flare up and the 

prevalence of human trafficking, including labour exploitation. Conflict and war are never far 

away. Unhappily this sad reality confronts us daily, in Syria, in Eritrea and in the form of the 

refugees who are arriving in the European Union. What do they have and where will they end up? 

We have to be alert to their vulnerability, also to labour exploitation.  

By listing these viewpoints I have shown how the same reality can be approached from different 

angles. Each of these viewpoints has helped us gain a better grasp of the phenomenon. Each of 

these angles throws light on part of the reality but in fact fails to encompass the whole. A feature 

of particular points of view is that they are limited and relative. Confining the matter to, for 

instance, the criminal law or victim approach has its shortcomings. As the Israeli researcher 

Shamir has put it they concentrate on the post exploitation situation.  

The criminal offence has taken place.  

The victim is identified.  

The suffering has occurred.  



4 
 

But looking back on what has happened is not enough. Here lies the importance of  the migration 

and labour market angle which, unlike the criminal law or victim’s viewpoint, actually focus on 

the future, or in any event on structural, improvements that must ultimately enable labour 

exploitation to be prevented or eradicated. The labour market approach embodies the promise of 

greater empowerment of employees to put them in a stronger position vis à vis their employers. 

Vulnerable workers can also be helped by regulations in the domain of work and income: The 

labour migration approach concentrates on the causes and dynamic factors driving this form of 

migration. Investigating the obstacles to labour migration, as well as its potential and risks, may 

bring us closer to a more effective policy on international mobility.  

Ladies and gentlemen, let me revert to the evocative image of the kaleidoscope. As I’ve already 

said we can come to grips with human trafficking from several angles. But I am absolutely 

convinced that individual perspectives only have added value if they are combined. That is the 

basic idea behind my kaleidoscopic view that I want to share with you. The kaleidoscopic view 

must, to my mind, lie at the roots of every policy on human trafficking. The idea derives from 

two simple observations.  

‐ The reality of human trafficking is too complex to grasp solely from a single angle. 

‐ Human trafficking policy in a country should ideally be based on an interplay of different 

perspectives.  

 

The kaleidoscopic view involves the integration of viewpoints as its starting point. It is not a 

matter of choosing between one or the other but of looking at them all.  

 

Looking back in the way the criminal law or victim approach does. 

Looking forward from the migration and labour law angle.  

 

It is a question of prosecuting perpetrators and protecting victims and workers. 

It is a question of strengthening their position in the criminal justice system, but also investigating 

why migrants come to the European Union to work, which sectors they choose and which sectors 

choose them, where they are to be found and how we can prevent them from being exploited. 

Repression coupled with prevention. 

How the various perspectives can be used to find the best strategies for solutions remains the 

most pregnant question. Answering that question is no easy task. Integrating entails thinking 

seriously about what the different approaches involve and how they interact.  



5 
 

Days like today and tomorrow offer a unique opportunity for coming up with some answers. 

Let’s make the integration of angles of approach our leitmotif, the kaleidoscope our metaphor.  

‘Humankind cannot bear very much reality’, T.S. Eliot wrote. Perhaps he’s right. We opt for one 

viewpoint because altogether it’s too complicated. But we must never turn our backs on the 

reality of modern slavery and the many angles from which we can come to grips with it.  

 


