












































 

 

 

Does legalised prostitution generate more human trafficking? 

 

 

There is growing concern about the effects of prostitution policy on the overall scale of human 

trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation. However, it is not known how many women are 

forced to work in the prostitution sector in relation to the number who do so voluntarily. In 

Amsterdam alone, an estimated 8,000 prostitutes work in the sex industry.1 According to the 

National Threat Assessment on Organised Crime, an estimated 20,000 people in the 

Netherlands were working in prostitution in 2012. While a similar estimate has been repeatedly 

cited,2 it seems to come from a study carried out in 1999, before the abolition of the ban on 

brothels.3 At the moment, there are no reliable figures available for the total number of 

prostitutes in the Netherlands.4 Evidently, some prostitutes are exploited, but because of the 

hidden nature of both human trafficking and prostitution, it is difficult to say how large this 

proportion is. In that context, the National Threat Assessment said: ‘We do find that the figure of 

800 victims in 20105 is a minimum because of a limited6 willingness among victims to report 

offences.7 Victims are afraid that their family will be subjected to violence if they report to the 

police. It is not known how much higher the actual number of victims is, because of the 

                                                           
1 Centre de Recherches Internationales et de Documentation sur l’Exploitation Sexuelle (CRIDES) de la Fondation 
Scelles 2012; see also Beke 2010, p. 32. 
2 In the evaluation of the lifting of the ban on brothels by the Ministry of Security and Justice’s Research and 
Documentation Centre (WODC) in 2007, this estimate was mentioned but with the proviso that the precise 
composition of the total population of prostitutes was not known, since part of the population of prostitutes is fairly 
invisible (WODC 2007, p. 32); Soa Aids also refers to 20,000 prostitutes in the Netherlands (‘Frequently asked 
questions’ Soa Aids n.d., www.prostitutie.nl/index.php?id=174#c250 (consulted on 21 June 2013)); see also Centre 
de Recherches Internationales et de Documentation sur l’Exploitation Sexuelle (CRIDES) de la Fondation Scelles 
2012. 
3 Mens & Van der Helm 1999. 
4 Because of the hidden character of prostitution, like human trafficking, it is also difficult to estimate the total 
number of prostitutes. 
5 This is a reference to the 749 persons who, according to CoMensha’s, records, were sexually exploited in 2010; see 
also NRM 2012f, Table B3.1.14. 
6 There probably is a significant dark number with respect to the number of victims. At the same time, there are 
possibly a number of false positives in CoMensha’s records, meaning that a case registered as human trafficking is in 
reality not, since possible victims are reported to CoMensha and there is no formal assessment; see also NRM 2012f, 
p. 20. 
7 As already mentioned, the human trafficking that is registered also depends on a number of factors that are not 
necessarily related to the total scale of human trafficking; see NRM 2012f, pp. 51, 73, 165-166. 



 2  

significant disparity in the views about the size of the dark number in relation to victims of 

human trafficking.’
8
 

 

The total scale of human trafficking 

The total scale of human trafficking is the aggregate of what is visible and invisible.9, 10 The 

ideal situation would be for every instance of human trafficking to be known, in which case 

there would be no ‘dark number’ (the number of human trafficking situations that are not 

known to any agency: the ‘invisible’ human trafficking). However, because of the hidden 

nature of human trafficking, in reality there will always be a dark number, which can only be 

estimated. The problem, however, is not that there are no estimates but that the estimates 

that have been made are inaccurate or unreliable.11 The report ‘Trafficking in Human Beings. 

Visible and Invisible’ contained a critical analysis of three estimates that have been made of 

the total number of victims,12 with the aim of prompting further discussion of national and 

international estimates and promoting efforts to improve methods for making a reasonably 

reliable estimate on which consensus could be reached.13, 14 

 

Figures are used to reinforce viewpoints and can form the basis for intensive policy measures. 

However, positions are sometimes taken on the basis of unverifiable, unreliable or inaccurate 

data. For example, estimates are sometimes taken from earlier studies to demonstrate the 

alarming scale of prostitution or human trafficking without any enquiry into how the original 

researchers arrived at their estimates.15 But ‘bad data are worse than no data’.16 As regards the 

use of statistics for the development of ‘evidence-based policy making’, it is essential to be 

certain of the reliability and validity of the data in order to avoid reaching ‘evidence-thin’ 

conclusions.17 

 

                                                           
8 Nationaal Dreigingsbeeld Georganiseerde Criminaliteit (National Threat Assessment on Organised Crime) 2012, pp. 
65-66.  
9 ‘The total scale of human trafficking is equal to the human trafficking that is registered (the known human 
trafficking) minus the false positives (the human trafficking that is registered as such but in reality is not) plus the 
dark number (the unregistered/unknown human trafficking, including the false negatives (the human trafficking that 
is known /visible, but has not yet been recognised as such). In short, it is the aggregate of the ‘visible human 
trafficking’ and the ‘invisible human trafficking’. (NRM 2012f, p. 26). 
10 The visible component of human trafficking (the registered human trafficking) depends to a large extent on 
developments related to factors such as the attention devoted to human trafficking in society, the priorities that are 
set and the capacity that is made available within investigative agencies and the Public Prosecution Service (PPS) 
(‘the more you look, the more you will find’ principle), the method of registration by the relevant agencies and 
changes in legislation; see also NRM 2012f, pp. 51, 73, 165-166. 
11 For the specific reservations regarding the estimates, see NRM 2012f, §2.4.1; §2.4.2. 
12 A national estimate of victims of sexual exploitation in the Crime Projection Analysis (CBA), a national estimate of 
victims of other forms of exploitation by FairWork and an international estimate of forced labour by the ILO; see also 
NRM 2012f, Chapter 2.  
13 The National Rapporteur has made the following recommendation for improvement: ‘The government should 
endeavour to produce adequate estimates of the scale of human trafficking. In addition to complete and reliable data 
collection, this calls for statistical expertise.’ (NRM 2012f, recommendation 1). 
14 See NRM 2012f, §2.1. 
15 See also Weitzer 2012, pp. 1344-1345. 
16 Weitzer 2012, p. 1350. 
17 See also Weitzer 2012. 



 3  

Investigations of the effects of legalised prostitution 

The effect of legalised prostitution in preventing cross-border human trafficking for the purpose 

of sexual exploitation has been investigated in a number of academic articles. Two recent 

examples are ‘Does legalised prostitution increase human trafficking?’ by Seo Young Cho, Axel 

Dreher and Eric Neumayer (2012)18 and ‘The law and economics of international sex slavery: 

prostitution laws and trafficking for sexual exploitation’ by Niklas Jakobsson and Andreas 

Kotsadam (2013).19 The authors of both articles reach the same conclusion: there are more 

human trafficking situations in countries where prostitution has been legalised. This section 

describes how such academic studies are still in their infancy because the data and the research 

methods are not (yet) complete and are insufficiently reliable to support the conclusions drawn 

or to provide a basis for policy. 

 

First and foremost, the articles are based on cross-sectional quantitative research, which cannot 

be used to draw the conclusion that the legalisation of prostitution results in more human 

trafficking.20 Cho, Dreher and Neumayer used the report ‘Global Patterns’ (2006) by the United 

Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)21 to investigate the degree of correlation between 

prostitution legislation in a particular country and the reported stream of human trafficking to 

that country.22 To verify whether the authors’ conclusions also held true for other data sets, in 

addition to the data from the UNODC report, Jakobsson and Kotsadam also used data from 

‘Globalization and the illicit market for human trafficking: an empirical analysis of supply and 

demand’, a report produced by the International Labour Organization (ILO).23 That report 

referred to a data set that the ILO compiled for its first estimate in 2005, which was based on a 

large number of reports containing information about human trafficking in the period 1995-

2004.24 Because cross-sectional research provides no indication of the impact of changes in 

prostitution legislation in a particular period on the total scale of human trafficking, a second 

method was adopted. Cho, Dreher and Neumayer carried out three case studies on the situation 

in Sweden, Denmark and Germany, countries in which prostitution legislation was amended 

during the period covered by their study (1996-2003).25 To assess the effect of changes in 

prostitution legislation, they used existing estimates of the total number of victims.26 Jakobsson 

and Kotsadam also stated that there were no reliable longitudinal data for human trafficking. To 

support the argument that there is a causal relationship between prostitution legislation and 

                                                           
18 Cho, Dreher & Neumayer 2012. 
19 Jakobsson & Kotsadam 2013. 
20 Cross-sectional research is research that looks at a single moment in time: in other words, a snapshot. The opposite 
is longitudinal research, where the study is conducted over a certain period in order to document the process. For 
longitudinal research, however, there must be a baseline measurement: how much human trafficking was there 
before the policy change? Such baseline measurements are not always feasible for policy changes that were 
introduced several years earlier. 
21 UNODC 2006. There is now a more recent report on human trafficking by the UNODC, which takes into account 
some of the reservations discussed here; see also NRM9, §2.2.1. 
22 The UNODC report provides information about the human trafficking reported to and in 161 countries (UNODC 
2006). The analysis by Cho, Dreher and Neumayer encompassed 150 countries (Cho, Dreher & Neumayer 2012). 
23 Danailova-Trainor & Belser 2006. 
24 This information yielded an ILO database that was used for an earlier report by the ILO, which gave an estimate of 
the minimum scale of forced labour: ‘ILO minimum estimate of forced labour in the world’; see NRM 2012f, §2.4 for 
more information about the ILO’s estimates (in 2005 and in 2012). 
25 Cho, Dreher and Neumayer 2012, p. 22. 
26 The estimates are based on different sources for each case study, including an estimate mentioned by Ekberg 2004; 
Nicola et al. 2005. 



 4  

human trafficking, they carried out two case studies for Sweden and Norway,27 countries where 

buying sex was made a criminal offence in 1999 and 2009, respectively.  

 

Although the authors of both articles employed a refined method for the cross-sectional study, 

there are a number of reservations to be expressed about their conclusions, relating mainly to 

the quantity and quality of the available data. The most important reservation is that there was 

very little analysis of the proportion of visible victims of human trafficking in relation to the 

proportion that is invisible. The authors relied on data concerning human trafficking situations 

that were known, using the datasets of the UNODC and ILO, which greatly depend on the human 

trafficking that has been registered in individual countries. What is visible can be influenced by 

factors such as the attention devoted to human trafficking in society, the priorities that are set 

and the capacity that is made available within, for example, the investigative services. 

Accordingly, the surveys in the UNODC report are based, among other things, on the number of 

times that a country is mentioned in various sources as the country of destination of victims.28 

The prominence given to a country in the report is to a large extent determined by the attention 

devoted to human trafficking in that country.29,30 It is also conceivable that legalisation of 

prostitution has an impact in making human trafficking visible. Invisible human trafficking can 

only be estimated, but, as already mentioned, at the moment there are no reliable estimates of 

the total scale of human trafficking.31 Jakobsson and Kotsadam do refer – but only briefly – to 

the distinction between visible and invisible prostitution. They reportedly found no evidence 

that hidden prostitution had increased in Sweden and Norway, but added that they could not 

rule out the possibility that it was so deeply hidden that it had not been identified by any agency 

at all, investigative or otherwise.32 

 

A second reservation relates to the case studies that the researchers conducted. Two and three 

case studies are too few to allow for judgements at an international level about the effect of 

specific prostitution policies. More reliable data are needed from a larger number of case 

studies. Furthermore, making accurate and reliable comparisons of the total number of victims 

before and after amendment of prostitution legislation in a particular country seems impossible 

in these countries because there is little or no information available about the human trafficking 

registered before the changes in the policy towards prostitution were made, never mind the 

total number of victims of human trafficking (registered and unregistered). 

                                                           
27 For this the researchers used information from other published sources. 
28 UNODC 2006. 
29 See also GAO 2006; NRM5, pp. 9-10. 
30 In the Fifth Report, the National Rapporteur  said the following about the UNODC report in 2006: ‘The overviews in 
the UNODC report are based on the number of times a particular country is mentioned as a country of origin, transit 
or destination for victims in a range of sources. This means that the part played by a country in the report is 
determined to a significant extent by the amount of attention paid to trafficking in human beings in that country. [...] 
Many countries voiced fierce criticism of a draft version of the report at the end of 2005. Apart from the points 
mentioned above, the National Rapporteur also pointed out the geographical bias (it is, for example, highly incredible 
that not a single African country is classified as ‘very high’ among destination countries) as well as problems of 
methodology, such as the absence of information concerning the validity and reliability of the base material (NRM5, 
pp. 9-10); see NRM9, §2.2.1 for more information about the more recent report by UNODC (2012). 
31 See NRM 2012f, Chapter 2. 
32 Jakobsson & Kotsadam 2013, p. 103. 



 5  

Conclusion 

It is not (yet) possible to give an answer, on the basis of statistics, to the question of the extent 

to which legalisation of prostitution leads to more human trafficking. The answer would require 

an analysis of the human trafficking that is visible compared with the invisible human 

trafficking and this calls for the collection of more reliable data – both quantitative and 

qualitative – concerning visible and invisible human trafficking.33,34 Research into the effect of 

the legalisation of prostitution is also complicated by the fact that the total scale of human 

trafficking in the sense of sexual exploitation is not solely dependent on policies towards 

prostitution. Such research would also have to encompass all other push-and-pull factors that 

could have an impact on the prevalence of human trafficking in a particular country, and which 

can differ greatly from one country to another. Nevertheless, one component of an effective 

approach to combating human trafficking is to make human trafficking visible.35 First and 

foremost, that calls for a clearer picture of the nature and scale of the prostitution sector. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

                                                           
33 The researchers themselves mention the limitations of their article: ‘The problem here lies in the clandestine 
nature of both the prostitution and trafficking markets, making it difficult, perhaps impossible, to find hard evidence 
establishing this relationship’ (Cho, Dreher & Neumayer, 2012, p. 76). ‘Although the data do not allow us to infer 
robust causal inference, the results suggest that criminalizing procuring, or going further and criminalizing buying 
and/or selling sex, may reduce the amount of trafficking to a country.’... ‘It should be noted once again that the data 
quality on international human trafficking is far from perfect and we strongly recommend more data collection.’ 
(Jakobsson & Kotsadam, 2013, abstract). 
34 The National Rapporteur has already made a recommendation on how to produce adequate estimates (NRM 2012f, 
recommendation 1). 
35 See NRM 2012f, Chapter 1 and Chapter 8: ‘To tackle human trafficking effectively, it must be made visible. Human 
trafficking that is hidden must be revealed – and once revealed, it must be better registered.’ 



 6  

Literature 
 

Beke 2010  

A. Van Wijk, A. Nieuwenhuis, D. van Tuyn, T. van Ham, J. Kuppens, H. Ferwerda, Kwetsbaar 

beroep. Een onderzoek naar de prostitutiebranche in Amsterdam, Amsterdam: Bureau Beke 2010. 

Cho, Dreher & Neumayer 2012  

S. Cho, A. Dreher, E. Neumayer, ‘Does legalized prostitution increase human trafficking?’, World 

Development 2012-41/1, pp. 67-82. 

Danailova-Trainor & Belser 2006  

G. Danailova-Trainor, & P. Belser, Globalization and the illicit market for human trafficking: An 

empirical analysis of supply and demand. International Labour Office, Working paper 53. 

Di Nicola, Orfano, Cauduro, Conci 2006  

Di Nicola, I. Orfano, A. Cauduro, N. Conci, Study on National Legislation on Prostitution and the 

Trafficking in Women and Children, European Parliament / Transcrime - Joint Research Centre 

on Transnational Crime 2005, http://ec.europa.eu/anti-trafficking/download.action;jsessionid 

=HZL7ScQDRQVh912Q1yhVdT9f3zpCTz1jbMpwZTn51vTt3bnqqTdv!809199083?nodePath=%

2FEU+Policy%2FStudy+on+National+Legislation+and+Prostitution_en.pdf&fileName=Study+on

+National+Legislation+and+Prostitution_en.pdf&fileType=pdf. 

Ekberg 2004  

G. Ekberg, ‘The Swedish Law that prohibits the Purchase of sexual Services’, Violence Against 

Women 2004- 10/10, pp. 1187-1218. 

GAO 2006  

United States Government Accountability Office, Human Trafficking: Better Data, Strategy, and 

Reporting Needed to Enhance U.S. Anti trafficking Efforts Abroad, GAO-06-825, Washington D.C.: 

2006, http://www.gao.gov/ new.items/d06825.pdf. 

ILO 2012  

International Labour Organization, Global estimate of forced labour. Executive summary, Geneva: 

ILO 2012. 

Jakobsson en Kotsadam 2013  

N. Jakobsson, & A. Kotsadam, ‘The law and economics of international sex slavery: prostitution 

laws and trafficking for sexual exploitation’, European Journal of Law and Economics 2013-35/1, 

pp. 87-107. 

 

 

 

http://ec.europa.eu/anti-trafficking/download.action


 7  

NRM 5  

National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings, Fifth Report of the Dutch National 

Rapporteur, The Hague: Bureau of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 

2007. 

NRM 2012f  

National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings, Trafficking in Human Beings: Visible and 

Invisible. A quantitative report 2007-2011, The Hague: Bureau of the National Rapporteur on 

Trafficking in Human Beings 2012. 

NRM9 

National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings, Ninth Report of the Dutch National 

Rapporteur, The Hague: Bureau of the National Rapporteur on Trafficking in Human Beings 

2013 (to be published in English).  

Nationaal Dreigingsbeeld Georganiseerde Criminaliteit  2012 

Korps Landelijke Politiediensten, Nationaal Dreigingsbeeld 2012. Georganiseerde criminaliteit. 

Zoetermeer: Dienst IPOL 2012. 

UNODC 2006  

United Nations Office for Drug Control and Crime, Trafficking in persons. Global Patterns, Vienna: 

UNODC 2006. 

Van Mens & van der Helm 1999  

L. van Mens, T. van der Helm, Mobiliteit in de Nederlandse prostitutie. Een inventarisatie. 

Uitgevoerd in het kader van EUROPAP 1998-1999. Utrecht 1999, 

http://www.prostitutie.nl/fileadmin/nl/6._Studie/6.3_ Documenten/6.3b_Gezondheidszorg/ 

pdf/Student.Doc.Gzhz8.pdf. 

Weitzer 2012  

R. Weitzer, ‘Sex trafficking and the sex industry: the need for evidence-based theory and 

legislation’, The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology, 2012-101 (4), pp. 1337-1369.  

WODC 2007  

A.L. Daalder, Prostitutie in Nederland na opheffing van het bordeelverbod, The Hague: Ministry of 

Security and Justice’s Research and Documentation Centre, Boom Juridische uitgevers 2007. 

 


