













































Speech 16 oktober


Journey 
16 October  
 
Your Majesty, Your Excellencies, Mr Mayor, esteemed guests, 
 
Yesterday marked ten years’ existence of an independent rapporteur. Unfortunately, ten years 
of work in this field does not mean that the phenomenon is declining or disappearing. It is 
however becoming more visible. 
Yesterday I presented my 8th report to the State Secretary of Security and Justice. The report 
covers the situation in the Netherlands during the last ten years and reviews my 
recommendations in that period. Human trafficking is, however, a worldwide problem, 
frequently involving cross-border organised crime, and flagrant breaches of the human rights 
of those individuals who are merely looking for a better life. There must be -and must 
continue to be - international attention to the macro-factors which constitute the source and 
breeding ground for cross-border human trafficking. 
 
As rapporteur in the past years I have been able to contribute to stepping up the fight against 
human trafficking and improving the care for victims in the Dutch context. Much has indeed 
improved. Let me mention as an example the provisions for victims of human trafficking in 
legislation on aliens. Many recommendations in this field have been adopted and this had led 
to significant improvements to regulations and policy. I am happy about this.  
 
But there is however a persistent problem with the help provided to under-aged victims, girls 
who are vulnerable, and therefore susceptible to the charms of attractive pimps or loverboys, 
as we call them.  They include neglected girls, those with a slight mental handicap or other, 
sometimes, multiple problems 
We need a vision on the assistance and care that the youth care services should provide to un-
der-age victims. A national strategy for caring for this category of victims should have been 
formulated long ago, embracing key aspects such as a pedagogical climate, safety, small 
groups and education.  It is unacceptable that a vision and strategy has not yet been developed 
in view of the many national under age victims encountered over the past decade. 
 
I have a very clear idea of how we should help this group. They need to be protected and 
secure, and inaccessible to the human traffickers, in a setting where they cannot easily escape 
to rejoin their loverboy. But they should explicitly not end up in prison or detention. The need 
to be in small groups with fellow victims, where they will not be stigmatised and where those 
providing help and care know exactly what they have been through and how they should be 
approached. In an institution where any traumas and underlying problems can be diagnosed 
and from where they can be adequately referred on to the specific help they need. But help in 
a setting where people know about and pay attention to the ensuing criminal proceedings At 
present, admission to a closed, integrated youth care facility often means an impediment to 
any further investigation. And that’s not what we want. Human traffickers need to prosecuted 
and punished.  
 
I see four establishments, scattered throughout the country so that the girls can be taken out of 
their environment, weaned off their lover boys and where they cannot be found. In a pleasant, 
remote setting, protective, but not a prison. Where there is an educative climate with facilities 
like classes and help with their specific problems.  
 

 1



It is a project that is dear to my heart, as they say. I would have been very happy to see my 
recommendations on this point in particular given some follow-up.  
 
Your Majesty, Your Excellencies, Mr Mayor, dear guests, 
 
The reason we are here is to visit Journey. 
Journey is made up of seven sea containers together telling the story of a victim of sexual 
exploitation. Each container has been designed by a different artist or artists and portrays one 
specific aspect of the victim’s experience, representing the seven stages of the victim’s story. 
As you walk through the containers, you can experience human trafficking.  
The exhibition gives the general public a unique opportunity to learn about the nature and 
impact of human trafficking. But also potential victims (of loverboys for example), potential 
young offenders, as well as consumers, clients of prostitutes, and employers need to be more 
aware of the fact that human trafficking is here and now and on our doorstep. The exhibition 
is intended to spark a general discussion on human trafficking and to raise awareness. 
We have brought Journey to the Netherlands to mark our tenth anniversary. And I am proud 
of the fact that after London, Vienna, New York and Madrid, Journey is now here, in the city 
of peace and justice. 
I am very glad that Helen Bamber, Emma Thompson and Trevor Robinson, as founders and 
creators of Journey are here today to show us their unique installation.  
And Now Your Majesty, with your permission, I would like to go outside and give you the 
opportunity to experience Journey. 
 
 
  

 2


