 pagina van speech by corinne dettmeijer dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children on the occasion of the presentation of the report monitoring target . of the united nations sustainable development goals september new york. the added value of knowing how many trafficking victims exist in one s country and how it contributes enormously to evidence based policies let me start by expressing my gratitude to unodc. our collaboration in this important research project has been enlightening. and of course i d like to thank all of you for joining this meeting that was made possible by the unodc as kristiina kangaspunta pointed out it is crucial for countries to report on indicator . . of the sustainable development goals sdg s number of victims of human trafficking per population by sex age and form of exploitation . this indicator contributes greatly to the fight against human trafficking on both a national and international level. my aim is to show you the ways in which knowing the number of trafficking victims in one s country enables the development of evidence based policies. but let me start by briefly explaining why we used the multiple systems estimation mse method for estimating the true number of trafficking victims in the netherlands. firstly as you all know human trafficking just like most other crimes contends with a dark figure an unknown number of undetected victims. secondly numbers on detected victims tend to reflect the effort put into uncovering human trafficking rather than the true volume of trafficking. comparisons of the number of detected victims across time or between countries for example might therefore easily lead to fundamentally flawed conclusions. the most common method to gain insight into the hidden part of crime is through conducting victim surveys among the population. however unlike most other types of crime like burglary or street mugging pagina van human trafficking tends to be statistically rare and also more deeply hidden in the population at large concentrated in more hard to reach subpopulations like undocumented migrants . this is true for most countries with a relatively high standard of living like the netherlands. moreover asking people about their personal experiences with exploitation especially sexual exploitation is very challenging if not impossible due to feelings of fear or shame among respondents. as a result victim surveys on human trafficking are not available in countries like the netherlands. and this is where the mse method comes in. the basis of the mse method is the existence of multiple registrations of detected trafficking victims between whom the overlap can be determined. mse allows an estimation of the number of victims not appearing in any of the registrations given the distribution of the detected victims over the different registrations. the basic idea is as follows when most victims are detected or in other words when the dark figure is relatively small quite a few victims will be detected by more than one identifying organization for example by the police as well as by a service providing organization . this means that the overlap between registrations will be considerable. when victims are poorly detected or in other words when the dark figure is relatively large the incidentally detected victims will usually be detected by only one identifying organization. this means that the overlap between registrations will be very small. it is important to note here that in case a country practically does not detect any victims an mse cannot be carried out. similarly an mse cannot be carried out in a country where victims are detected but are not registered by different identifying organizations or if they are registered but the different registrations are not compatible the registrations lack identifying information that can determine the overlap . pagina van you might know of previous endeavors to estimate human trafficking by the predecessor of the mse the capture recapture method or previous iterations of mse itself. i shall briefly explain how these attempts have contributed to the development of the present mse but also why the present mse is in my opinion the first really indicative iteration. as opposed to the capture recapture method the mse method is based on three or more registrations instead of only two. this means that despite the increased complexity of calculations after more registrations some of the severe conditions that are hard to fulfill in the case of human trafficking are relaxed. in comparison to previous iterations the present mse is based on a much bigger dataset almost that includes data on detected victims in six consecutive years . this results in a much stronger basis and therefore a much more robust estimation. as opposed to previous iterations the present mse includes four covariates with different inclusion probabilities gender female male age minor adult nationality dutch foreign and form of exploitation sexual other . different inclusion probabilities means that certain groups of victims have other chances of being detected than other groups of victims. if this is the case for example when victims of sexual exploitation are more likely to be detected than victims of other forms of exploitation separate estimations should be made for each of these different groups of victims. additionally the different estimations of the different subpopulations of trafficking victims based on the four covariates serve important policy purposes. the following results will clearly illustrate that. the present mse was carried out on the basis of almost detected victims in the netherlands who were included in five different registrations pagina van police inspectorate szw regional coordinators residential treatment centers and shelters and others in a period of six consecutive years and included four relevant covariates gender age nationality and form of exploitation . this resulted in a total estimation of between to trafficking victims per year. the average estimate in the most recent years of and included in the mse model came out to victims per year. this equals about victims per population. dutch girls between and years old and foreign residents run the highest risk of being victimized there are as many as victims for every dutch girls and victims for every foreigners. on average about one in five victims in the netherlands is detected by one or more identifying organization. but this detection rate differs between different groups of victims. the largest group of victims are victims of domestic sex trafficking. they make up about half of the total number of victims and turn out to be more hidden than other groups only of domestic sex trafficking victims are detected. in addition half of all domestic sex trafficking victims are minors and these minors are even more hidden than their adult counterparts only of underage domestic sex trafficking victims get detected compared to of the adult domestic sex trafficking victims . cross border sex trafficking victims make up about one fifth of the total. this group of victims are most easily detected about one third of all such victims are. nonetheless the majority of these victims remain undetected. cross border trafficking victims of other non sexual forms of exploitation also make up about one fifth of the total. in comparison to their sex trafficking counterparts they are poorly detected only one in five such victims are in comparison to one in three cross border sex trafficking victims . half of the trafficking victims of this group pagina van are males the females tend to remain less visible of the female victims of cross border trafficking for non sexual exploitation gets detected compared to of the male victims of cross border trafficking for non sexual exploitation . it is exactly this information that we urgently need in order to tackle human trafficking more effectively. on the basis of this estimation i can show the dutch government that much more effort needs to be put into the detection of domestic sex trafficking victims especially minors by the police and youth care providers . similar improvements need to be made in order to detect cross border trafficking for non sexual exploitation in particular into sectors in which females are exploited . i will publish these recommendations on october th the eu s anti trafficking day. i am proud of this joint research project between the unodc and myself my bureau and i am convinced that other countries will similarly benefit greatly from gaining insight into their blank and blind spots. moreover when similar indicative estimations in other countries become available international comparisons on the different types of trafficking will be made possible. it is therefore my hope that this pilot study in the netherlands will spur other countries to initiate similar studies that require the involvement of statistical experts on mse. however i can not stress enough that truly indicative estimations cannot be made by statistical experts alone. close cooperation between statistical experts and national experts on human trafficking and data collection is essential to this end. 