 introduction the responsibility of governments to protect children from sexual violence does not end at the national borders. in this paper we place the fight against sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism in the broader context of combating sexual violence against children in general. we propose new terminology to emphasize this integration of the two phenomena and delineate the responsibilities of governments both within and outside their borders when it comes to protecting children from sexual violence. although the cross border element often makes it more difficult for governments to meet those responsibilities it does not make them any less important. sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism what is it we define sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism hereafter sectt as acts of sexual violence against children where the offender has crossed a border. it is important to stress that the question of whether the offender has given or promised money or goods to the child or any other person is irrelevant. accordingly in contrast to some other interpretations or definitions that are adopted internationally this definition does not require commercial governments responsibilities as countries of demand supply and or victimisation expert paper suzanne kragten heerdink laura menenti and corinne dettmeijer vermeulen sexual exploitation. furthermore our interpretation of travel also includes semi permanent settlement of offenders in other countries than their countries of origin migration . however our definition leaves aside sexual exploitation of children by domestic travellers and tourists at least two different countries must be involved. a common explanation given for sectt is the assumption that the threshold for committing sexual violence against children is lower in less developed countries. an offender may find it easier to justify sexual violence against a child to himself if the child is living in poverty neutralization techniques . for example because he is giving the child or the victim s family money or goods denial of injury the child is actually grateful because the child engages in prostitution in order to survive denial of the victim it s what the child wants or because the child is being prostituted denial of responsibility sex with children is accepted here . an offender might also feel that the benefits outweigh the risk of being punished due to anonymity the low priority given to tackling sexual violence against children locally corruption the possibility of offering bribes to the victims or their families etc. rational choice theory . moreover opportunities to commit sexual violence against children may be easier to find abroad for instance in countries with a flourishing child prostitution industry routine activity theory . the increasing ease with which visits to these countries can be arranged is also a factor due to the availability of cheap flights and relaxed of visa restrictions. a new terminology in literature countries the offenders come from are referred to as countries of origin or source countries exit countries or sending countries and countries where children become victims as countries of destination. these terms are derived from the perspective of the offender the person who moves between countries. but this labelling of countries causes confusion. as in the case of cross border sex trafficking the immediate association made with sectt is usually one of the offenders from countries with a relatively high standard of living and victims from less developed countries. however in the case of cross border sex trafficking the person who moves is not the person seeking sexual services in other words the demand side the offender but the person who is compelled to provide those services in other words the supply side the victim . accordingly traditional countries of origin in the case of sectt are in fact traditional countries of destination in the case of cross border sex trafficking and vice versa. to emphasize the relationship between sectt and other forms of cross border sexual violence against children such as child sex trafficking we propose the following terminology. country of demand the offender s country of origin. this is the same in the case of both sectt and cross border sex trafficking. note in cases of sex trafficking the term offender does not refer to the sex trafficker but to the offender of child prostitution the client of the trafficked child minor exploited in prostitution . country of supply the victim s country of origin. this is the same in the case of both sectt and cross border sex trafficking. country of victimization the country where the child actually becomes a victim of sexual violence exploitation which is the country of supply in the case of sectt and the country of demand in the case of cross border sex trafficking. the suggested terminology also provides a solution for the phenomenon of livestreaming of child sexual exploitation material. this online form of sectt does not involve either offender or victim crossing a border and thus has no country of destination but does have a country of victimisation. figure further shows that the obvious associations do not fully cover the extent of the two phenomena. for example children in countries with a relatively high standard of living are also abused by foreign offenders just as victims of sex trafficking are also recruited in those countries less familiar . classifying countries as exclusively a country of demand or exclusively a country of supply therefore fails to reflect the actual reality. furthermore such a classification creates the risk of tunnel vision and the consequent failure to recognize sectt or sex trafficking in situations that do not correspond with the top of mind associations. after all the principle that if you don t look you won t find applies to both phenomena. sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism who should address it children are entitled to protection against sexual violence. governments are responsible for preventing and combating sexual violence against children in every situation in which they function as the country of victimisation the country of demand or the country of supply. in other words whenever sexual violence against children occurs in their own territory or occurs in another country but involves their own citizens whether as an offender or a victim. a government s responsibility does not end at the national borders. figure illustrates the relationship between cases of domestic sexual violence against children and cases with a cross border component. cross border cases such as sectt must therefore not be seen in isolation but in the wider perspective of protecting the sexual integrity of children always and everywhere. figure is an identification tool for inter national situations of sexual violence against children hereafter it is . governments can use it is as an instrument to identify every situation in which their country is involved and for which they are therefore responsible. it is shows that there are seven conceivable situations where a country bears responsibility. four of them situations and occur in the country itself the country itself is the country of victimisation and three situations and in another country. only situation does not involve any crossing of a border by the offender and or the victim the other six do. four of these six cross border situations constitute sectt situations and for in these situations the offender has crossed a border the country of demand differs from the country of victimisation . the seven situations do not all occur to the same extent while those that are most common and therefore deserve more attention differ from one country to another. figure sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism versus cross border sex trafficking a different country of victimisation naturally it is situation that is a priority for every country all forms of domestic sexual violence against children. for example a father who abuses his own child at home or an offender from country a guilty of child prostitution in that country that involves a minor exploited in prostitution from that same country often a victim of domestic sex trafficking . in cross border situations situations and however there are differences between countries. in these situations countries that function more as a country of demand than as a country of supply usually associated with countries with a relatively high standard of living should focus mainly on situations and . examples would include situation an offender from country a guilty of child prostitution in that country that involves a minor exploited in prostitution from another country often a victim of cross border sex trafficking . or situation a self styled benefactor from country a volunteers in an orphanage in another country and abuses children there. in contrast in countries that are more often the country of supply in cross border situations usually associated with less developed countries the emphasis should be more on situation . for example an offender from another country guilty of child prostitution in that other country that involves a minor from country a often a victim of cross border sex trafficking and situation for example an immigrant who abuses children as an employee of a day care centre in country a. this is not to say that situations and do not occur in the former countries or situations and in the latter countries so it is important to ensure that the focus on particular situations does not divert attention from cases that fall outside those situations the risk of tunnel vision . figure identification tool for inter national situations of sexual violence against children it is country a can be any country. the circle in the diagram is that country s own territory the blue line marked country of victimization therefore represents the country s actual borders and the four segments outside the circle represent the rest of the world every other country except country a . situations and are not a priority since instances of them usually follow on from the other situations. for example situation occurs when the father in the example given for situation also abuses his child during a holiday abroad. governments are responsible for combating sexual violence against children not only within but also beyond their own borders. it is illustrates the situations in which that responsibility arises and how close the relationship is between situations of cross border sexual violence against children such as sectt and cases of domestic sexual violence against children. sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism how do you address it governments are responsible for combating all forms of sexual violence against children in which they are involved as the country of demand supply or victimization. but what does that responsibility involve it follows from the relationship highlighted in the previous section that measures to address cross border sexual violence against children should be part of and should be the same as the measures taken to combat domestic sexual violence against children. broadly speaking measures to combat domestic sexual violence against children it is situation figure have three objectives preventing sexual violence against children with measures targeted at both potential victims and potential offenders. identifying and punishing offenders of sexual violence against children including measures to prevent recidivism. identifying victims of sexual violence against children and mitigating the harm they suffer including measures to prevent re victimisation. accordingly efforts to combat cross border sexual violence against children it is situation or figure should be designed to achieve those same three objectives. the difference however is that this calls for coordination and the exchange of information with other countries and with private actors and there are obstacles to that in practice. those obstacles do not however relieve a government of its responsibility. governments should therefore devote specific attention to establishing international and public private cooperation in their efforts to address cross border sexual violence against children including sectt. the combination of the seven conceivable situations of sexual violence against children in which a country is involved according to it is figure and the three objectives of measures to combat sexual violence against children provides a framework that governments can use to shape their policies against sectt. by way of an example we conclude this paper with a brief analysis of dutch policies to combat sectt in relation to the three aforementioned objectives. the dutch approach to combating sexual exploitation of children in travel and tourism with respect to sectt for the netherlands it is situation is the main priority although situation also occasionally occurs . one of the biggest cases of sexual violence against children in the netherlands is an example of the latter. the case involved a latvian man who after a previous conviction relating to child sexual exploitation material in germany moved to the netherlands and found work at a day care centre where he abused more than children. although the netherlands has made significant progress in addressing sectt in recent years its strategy as in many other countries is still in its infancy. some a notable omission however is the absence of measures designed to mitigate the harm suffered by victims objective in cases of sectt in situation a dutch national who commits sexual violence against a non dutch child in another country . for that other country it is situation a foreign national a dutch citizen who commits sexual violence against a child from that country in the country concerned . in some cases that country will take responsibility for these victims who are its own citizens as the netherlands will do in situation . however that leaves the question of what responsibility the netherlands has in those cases where the other nations fails to do so. conclusion children are entitled to protection against sexual violence. the responsibility of governments to provide this protection is generally clear when sexual violence occurs within the borders of their country but it does not end there. governments have a duty to fulfil whenever they are involved as the country of origin of offenders country of demand the country of origin of victims country of supply or the country of victimisation. broadly speaking these duties are to prevent sexual violence against children from occurring to find and sentence offenders and prevent them from reoffending and to find victims and minimize the damage done to them. governments should strive to extend the application of the national measures they have in place for achieving these three goals beyond their borders whenever they are involved. measures to prevent dutch nationals from committing sexual violence against children in other countries have already been adopted or are being developed see objective . they include the imposition of restrictions on the liberty of child sex offenders convicted in the netherlands with a high risk of recidivism. the restrictions prevent them from travelling abroad after serving their sentence. but also for example the exchange of information and the transfer of supervision within the european union for a select group of mobile high risk child sex offenders see the serious offending by mobile european criminals somec project . another measure falling under objective is the sharing of information with other countries about the criminal records of persons who wish to work with children abroad. dutch authorities have also taken measures to achieve objective identifying reporting investigating prosecuting trying and punishing dutch nationals who have been guilty of sexual violence against children in another country. in and for example the netherlands will coordinate the european campaign entitled don t look away the aim of which is to create a broad international structure for the identification and subsequent reporting of sectt. the basic principle of the policy towards the investigation and prosecution of offenders is that it should take place in the country of victimisation. in situation this is a country other than the netherlands. the netherlands has intensified its efforts to share information and provide legal assistance for example by appointing liaison officers by cooperating with non governmental organizations and by making formal arrangements in multilateral or bilateral treaties or memoranda of understanding . bibliography colby m. partnerships to end child sex tourism. posted july . http blog.usaid. gov partnerships to end child sex tourism . council of europe . convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. defence for children ecpat the netherlands . protection of children against sexual exploitation in tourism. leiden defence for children ecpat the netherlands. dutch ministry of security and justice april . voortgangsrapportage kinderpornografie en kindersekstoerisme progress report on child pornography and child sex tourism . parliamentary documents ii nr. . the hague. dutch ministry of security and justice june . co rdinatie europese campagne kindersekstoerisme don t look away coordination european campaign against child sex tourism don t look away . parliamentary documents ii nr. . the hague. dutch ministry of security and justice october . plan van aanpak kindersekstoerisme action plan against child sex tourism . supplement parliamentary documents ii nr. . the hague. dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children . barriers against child sex tourism summary report . the hague dutch rapporteur. accessed from http www.dutchrapporteur.nl reports child sex tourism . first world congress against commercial sexual exploitation of children . declaration and agenda for action. kemshall h. g. kelly b. wilkinson and s. hilder . offender management user guidance assessment and management of serious mobile european criminals. somec. long b.j. it s not easy being a child lover applying techniques of neutralization theory to case studies of intergenerational intimacy in the philippines . international journal of psychosocial rehabilitation no. . pp. . long b.j. it s not easy being a child lover applying techniques of neutralization theory to case studies of intergenerational intimacy in the philippines . international journal of psychosocial rehabilitation no. . pp. . newman w.j. b.w. holt j.s. rabun g.p. philips and c.l. scott. child sex tourism extending the borders of sexual offender legislation . international journal of law and psychiatry pp. . tanielian a.r. illicit supply and demand child sex exploitation in south east asia . national taiwan university law review no. pp. . un special procedures . report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography najat maalla m jid . un doc. a hrc . united nations . convention on the rights of the child. united nations . optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography. walters j. and p.h. davis. human trafficking sex tourism and child exploitation on the southern border . journal of applied research on children informing policy for children at risk no. article . zafft c.r. and s. tidball . a survey of child sex tourism in the philippines . paper presented at the second annual interdisciplinary conference on human trafficking. lincoln united states of america. september october . http blog.usaid.gov partnerships to end child sex tourism http blog.usaid.gov partnerships to end child sex tourism http www.dutchrapporteur.nl reports child sex tourism endnotes . sexual violence against children covers all sexual acts that are offences under the dutch criminal code and of which children are the victims and includes both hands on sexual abuse of a child child prostitution and hands off child sexual exploitation material for example offences. these encompass all behaviour that constitutes sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children as referred to in the council of europe convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention . . the synonym child sex tourism is often defined as a specific form of commercial sexual exploitation of children for example by the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography un special procedures report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography najat maalla m jid un doc. a hrc para. . . b.j. long it s not easy being a child lover applying techniques of neutralization theory to case studies of intergenerational intimacy in the philippines international journal of psychosocial rehabilitation no. w.j. newman et al. child sex tourism extending the borders of sexual offender legislation international journal of law and psychiatry j. walters and p.h. davis human trafficking sex tourism and child exploitation on the southern border journal of applied research on children informing policy for children at risk no. article m. colby partnerships to end child sex tourism posted july http blog.usaid.gov partnerships to end child sex tourism a.r. tanielian illicit supply and demand child sex exploitation in south east asia national taiwan university law review no. defence for children ecpat the netherlands protection of children against sexual exploitation in tourism leiden defence for children ecpat the netherlands c.r. zafft and s. tidball a survey of child sex tourism in the philippines paper presented at the second annual interdisciplinary conference on human trafficking lincoln september october . . or herself . in this paper the use of the masculine pronoun in relation to offenders always refers also to female offenders. . for example in the declaration and agenda for action of the first world congress against commercial sexual exploitation of children. . see also article optional protocol to the un convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography . . nb the offender in this case is the offender for whom committing sexual violence against children is the sole purpose of his actions as with the offender of child prostitution for instance . it is expressly not the sex trafficker whose objective is also profit. . see also article un convention on the rights of the child . . see also art. optional protocol to the crc and art. lanzarote convention. . dutch ministry of security and justice voortgangsrapportage kinderpornografie en kindersekstoerisme progress report on child pornography and child sex tourism parliamentary documents ii nr. the hague april . . h. kemshall g. kelly b. wilkinson and s. hilder offender management user guidance assessment and management of serious mobile european criminals somec . . dutch ministry of security and justice plan van aanpak kindersekstoerisme action plan against child sex tourism supplement parliamentary documents ii nr. the hague october dutch ministry of security and justice voortgangsrapportage progress report . . dutch ministry of security and justice co rdinatie europese campagne kindersekstoerisme don t look away coordination european campaign child sex tourism don t look away parliamentary documents ii nr. the hague june . . dutch ministry of security and justice plan van aanpak action plan . . dutch ministry of security and justice voortgangsrapportage progress report . http blog.usaid.gov partnerships to end child sex tourism http blog.usaid.gov partnerships to end child sex tourism global study exploitation of children in travel and tourism email globalstudysectt ecpat.net website globalstudysectt.org contact about the authors suzanne kragten heerdink researcher for the dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children. laura menenti researcher for the dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children. corinne dettmeijer vermeulen dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children who is also a member of the high level taskforce to end sexual exploitation of children in travel tourism. the dutch rapporteur s remit is to report on the nature and scale of trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children to conduct research into policy and the effects of policy in these areas and to make recommendations to the dutch government on improvements that can be made in efforts to address the problems. in the dutch rapporteur published a report concerned specifically with measures aimed at dutch nationals who commit sex offences against children abroad. a summary of the report is available in english dutch rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children barriers against child sex tourism summary report the hague dutch rapporteur . accessed from http www.dutchrapporteur.nl reports child sex tourism 