 microsoft word engels nrm e jvds definitief.doc trafficking in human beings supplementary figures sixth report of the dutch national rapporteur c.e. dettmeijer vermeulen dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings m. boot matthijssen e.m.h. van dijk h. de jonge van ellemeet m. smit iii contents overview of tables v abbreviations used vii introduction . introduction . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry . some developments around b and continued residence . appointment of human trafficking task force . municipalities amsterdam . trend report on the position of victims of human trafficking . the contents of the report victims . introduction . register of victims maintained by comensha . . country of origin . . age . . gender . . place of residence . . further background information about the victims . victims in the b . . b applications and permit awards . . age of persons with application for b . . gender of persons with application for b . . origin of persons with application for b . . continued residence . compensation suspects and convicted offenders . introduction . age . . age of suspects trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur iv . . age of convicted offenders . country of origin . . country of origin of suspects . . country of origin of convicted offenders . gender . . gender of suspects . . gender of convicted offenders prosecution . introduction . thb cases registered with the public prosecution service . . number of registered cases . . nature of the cases . cases dealt with by the public prosecution service . settlement by the court . . sentence imposed for most serious offence . . conviction for thb . appeal bibliography appendix thb provision in the dutch criminal code appendix explanation of the research methods the b research the pps data research appendix notes to tables and statistics notes to tables notes to the statistics used appendix additional tables v overview of tables table . ranking of the most common countries of origin of possible victims registered by comensha per annum table . nationality of possible victims registered by comensha per annum table . age distribution of possible victims registered with comensha per annum table . place of residence of possible victims at the time of registration with comensha table . age distribution of persons with application for b and table . nationality of persons with application for b and table . region of origin of persons with application for b and table . sentences imposed after conviction for human trafficking per annum table . decisions on compensation table . age of suspects by year of registration table . age of persons convicted of thb by year of conviction table . rankings of the most common countries of birth of suspects by year of registration table . countries of birth of suspects by year of registration table . rankings of countries of birth of persons convicted of thb by year of conviction table . countries of birth of persons convicted of thb by year of conviction table . number of registered cases including cases also involving under age victims per annum table . type of thb by year of registration table . most serious offence by year of registration table . remand in custody by year of registration table . cases dealt with by the pps by year in which they were dealt with table . settlement in first instance by year of settlement table . sentence imposed in first instance for the most serious offence by year of settlement table . sentences imposed by year trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur vi table . terms of custodial sentences imposed per annum table . appeal lodged by year of settlement in first instance table b . nationality of possible victims registered with comensha per annum table b . nationality of persons with b application or permit and table b . countries of birth of suspects by year of registration table b . countries of birth of persons convicted of thb by year of conviction vii abbreviations used b regulation chapter b of the aliens act implementation guidelines bnrm bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel office of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings comensha coordinatiecentrum mensenhandel coordination centre for human trafficking eu europese unie european union ind immigratie en naturalisatiedienst immigration and naturalisation service klpd korps landelijke politie diensten national police services agency ngo niet gouvernementele organisatie non governmental organisation nri nationale recherche informatie national crime intelligence service nrm nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm derde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel third nrm report nrm vijfde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel fifth nrm report pps public prosecution service sd standard deviation siba statistische informatievoorziening en beleidsanalyse statistical data and policy analysis unit stv stichting tegen vrouwenhandel foundation against trafficking in women thb trafficking in human beings wodc wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documentatiecentrum scientific research and documentation centre introduction . introduction continuing the regular pattern of alternating between comprehensive reports with qualita tive and quantitative information and shorter statistical updates this sixth report of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm is devoted mainly to statistics covering the period up to and including . the dutch government has not yet given a detailed response to the fifth report which appeared in the summer of nor has it been debated in parliament. consequently some of the recommendations made in that report have not yet been implemented. others have already been addressed or measures are currently being prepared to address them. for example national legislation is being drafted with a framework for more stringent rules governing municipal bye laws relating to estab lishments where commercial sexual services are provided recommendation nrm there have been some positive developments with regard to the b regulation for victims of hu man trafficking for example with respect to temporary residence permits and with regard to continued residence recommendations to nrm a human trafficking task force has been set up and talks are underway on category oriented initial reception for victims of human trafficking recommendation nrm . moreover in the police again published a police monitor on prostitution and human trafficking korpsmonitor prostitutie mensen handel detailing their efforts and success in monitoring licensed prostitution and combating illegal prostitution and human trafficking. the first trend report on the position of victims of human trafficking who have been exploited in the sex industry also appeared in . al though these and other developments are not covered in detail in this statistical report some recent developments in the netherlands are briefly described in this introductory chapter. . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry the fifth report contained a lengthy section on trafficking in human beings thb with a view to exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. one of the conclusions was that the absence of a precise definition of exploitation had hampered efforts to identify investi gate and prosecute human trafficking in sectors outside the sex industry in the period im mediately following the entry into force of article f of the dutch criminal code. in the meantime several new chain partners have taken steps to combat exploitation in these other sectors and to make provision for suitable care for victims of this type of thb. we confine ourselves here to mentioning the first criminal prosecutions that were brought against persons charged with this form of human trafficking. up to february four investigations had led to prosecutions for the exploitation of workers in sectors other than the sex industry. in november a number of defendants trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur who were charged with using bulgarians living illegally in the netherlands to pick hemp were acquitted of human trafficking. in another case the chef and sous chef of a chinese restaurant were also acquitted of human trafficking in the district court and the court of ap peal. the public prosecution service has appealed that decision to the supreme court. in the autumn of the prosecution of three individuals for human trafficking with a view to the exploitation of polish cleaning ladies also failed. at the time of writing the verdicts in this case can still be appealed. the first convictions which are not yet final and conclusive came in december . in that case the district court described the conditions under which the defendants had housed and employed their illegal indian domestic staff as tantamount to human trafficking. an important factor in this case was that the defendants had created a situation in which these people were entirely dependent on them to the extent that it consti tuted a serious violation of their physical and mental integrity and their personal freedom. the case law up to now confirms that article f of the dutch criminal code only relates to excessive abuses in employment situations. at the same time there are numerous pitfalls when it comes to weighing up the facts and circumstances in cases involving forms of ex ploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. examples include the question of whether or not the worker had any realistic alternative the relevance of who took the initiative for a finding that there has been human trafficking and whether or not the employee agreed to particular conditions. the scope of the prohibition on thb not related to the sex industry will probably become progressively clearer through case law. developments should be guided by the principles laid down in the treaties that the netherlands has signed and ratified and european legislation. . some developments around b and continued residence one of the positive developments with respect to chapter b of the aliens act implemen tation guidelines the b regulation is that since november a temporary residence permit can also be granted to victims who do not report a case of thb but do cooperate in some other way with the investigation and prosecution. this latest version of the b regula tion contains a passage on granting aliens who are in alien detention a period for reflection if there is evidence that an alien in detention is a victim of human trafficking the police must inform the alien of the possibility of reporting the crime to the police or otherwise co operating with the criminal investigation or prosecution. the suspected victim of human trafficking is then also entitled to the reflection period. the consequence of the granting of the reflection period shall be that the grounds for the detention shall lapse and the detention must therefore be ended . however the passage also states that the reflection period shall only be granted in these cases if the public prosecution department and the police agree to it. it is not yet clear what the criteria will be and what the implications of these conditions will be in practice. for example by making a statement or testifying as a witness. introducton recommendation nrm was that the grounds for continued residence under section a of chapter b in the aliens act implementation guidelines the victim has reported a criminal offence for a prosecution that has led to a conviction should not be confined to prosecutions that have led to a conviction for human trafficking. there should be a presump tion in law that repatriation would involve risks for the victim if the indictment included human trafficking even if the suspect is convicted of another criminal offence relating to thb but not for thb itself. this recommendation was adopted in the most recent amend ment of this section of the aliens act implementation guidelines. furthermore in accordance with another recommendation of the nrm the grounds for continued residence have been amended to more clearly reflect the fact that after three years in the b regulation the length of time the victim has resided in the netherlands constitutes the humanitarian ground on which an application for continued residence can be approved. it has also been made explicit that the stated grounds for approving continued residence such as fear of reprisals fear of prosecution for prostitution and the absence of possibilities for social reintegration are not exhaustive. . appointment of human trafficking task force the fifth report on human trafficking concluded with the observation that many of the recommendations were concerned with putting into practice arrangements that were al ready laid down in black and white and that a high level thb task force with representa tives from all the relevant chain partners could play an important role in stimulating and fa cilitating that. this recommendation was quickly addressed and a task force was indeed established on february under the chairmanship of the member of the council of procurators general responsible for the thb portfolio. the decree establishing the task force which will meet three times a year states that one of its duties is to identify and to solve or address bottlenecks. the nrm who is herself a member of the task force assumed from the outset that such a task force would also include representatives of ngos. when it became clear that this was possibly not the intention she repeatedly urged that ngos should participate. the fact that the victim assistance is not represented in the task force is a missed opportunity . municipalities amsterdam municipalities also have a responsibility in preventing and tackling human trafficking. one of the municipalities that has been particularly active in this regard is amsterdam. in re sponse to findings of abuses in the red light district the city put forward a package of measures designed among other things to crack down on human trafficking. for example other examples might be that the alien is suffering from psychological problems and is being treated in the netherlands is responsible for the care of children who were born in the netherlands or are pursuing their education here and the position of single women in the country of origin. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur one of the proposals is to make enjoying financial benefits directly from a relationship with a prostitute a criminal offence. other suggestions are to bar pimps who cause a nuisance from the area and to raise the minimum age for working as a prostitute to twenty one. the pack age also contained preventive measures some of them targeted at offenders such as training for prostitutes to help them resist the overtures of people who might exploit them and se curing the involvement of imams to help tackle the problem of loverboys. the desirability and feasibility of these and other measures are still being studied. meanwhile the city has already closed and or bought up a number of brothels and premises where window prosti tution was carried on. the nrm endorses the need for creative and innovative approaches in dealing with the problem of human trafficking. at the same time it is vital to pursue an integrated approach and in that context the illegal prostitution circuit must also be firmly dealt with especially since the envisaged plans are likely to lead to a shift of prostitution to the illegal circuit . po lice capacity must be released for this. . trend report on the position of victims of human trafficking the trend report on the position of victims of thb who have been exploited in the sex industry van vianen et al. presented the findings of a monitor that was developed to periodically survey the position of these victims on the basis of a number of indicators. the intention was to measure the trend every two years but it is impossible to acquire reliable information on quite a number of indicators and the researchers have concluded that before monitoring the situation again investment will be needed to improve the quality of registra tion and information gathering. another question raised is whether the bureau of the nrm bnrm can include some of the indicators that are reliable in the annual thb reports. a number of the indicators used in the monitor are already regularly included in the bnrm reports others can be added. it has to be noted here that as vianen et al. also men tioned in several of the databases that are used it is impossible to differentiate according to the sector in which the exploitation occurred. whereas in the year covered by the first trend report there were still only occasional cases of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry which will have little or no effect on identified trends this will change with the growing attention devoted to this phenomenon. this is also a problem for bnrm. al though bnrm s area of operations encompasses human trafficking in general it is never theless very important to be able to indicate in the reports which part of the quantitative data about investigations prosecutions and b applications and permit awards relates to exploi tation in the sex industry and which part relates to exploitation in other economic sectors or perhaps to human trafficking with a view to the removal of organs. an important added value of the trend report was that various databases were linked to each other which provided more insight into which databases can be linked and what informa tion those linkages yield. introducton . the contents of the report chapter is concerned with the victims of thb. it contains data about their age gender and country of origin from the coordination centre for human trafficking coordinatiecen trum mensenhandel comensha and information about b applications and permit awards from the immigration and naturalisation service immigratie en naturalisatie dienst ind . chapter presents data relating to suspects of thb and perpetrators convicted of thb with statistics about their age country of origin and gender. the data come from the public prosecution service. chapter concerns the prosecution of suspects of human trafficking. it contains data on the number and nature of the cases registered with the public prosecution department how the cases were handled by the public prosecutor and the disposition of the cases by the courts. finally a word of thanks is owed to all the individuals and agencies that have contributed to this report. victims . introduction this chapter contains statistical data on victims of thb. the background details include the age gender and country of origin of the victims. there are also statistics about the number of applications and permits awarded under the b regulation and concise information about compensation awarded to victims. the information comes from the coordination centre for human trafficking comensha formerly the foundation against trafficking in women stichting tegen vrouwenhandel stv and the immigration and naturalisation ser vice immigratie en naturalisatie dienst ind . the information about compensation comes from the records of the public prosecution service. . register of victims maintained by comensha one of comensha s tasks is to register possible victims of thb. these are victims who have been reported to comensha in various ways and by various reporters rather than vic tims who can be regarded as official victims on the basis of a formal assessment against specific criteria. however not all victims are identified and victims who have been identified are not all re ported. because comensha relies on third parties for information and says itself that it lacks the capacity needed to retrieve this information to the extent that it is available elsewhere little is known about many of the victims that have been reported. consequently it is in practice impossible to produce cross tabulations on more than basic features such as coun try of origin age and gender. there is possibly also some duplication especially where the information is limited. the number of possible victims of thb registered by comensha has grown annually from in to in and to in . the information in this section is based largely on databases provided by comensha. the figures presented differ in several respects this is an important point because these statistics on victims are often compared with data from other coun tries which usually relate exclusively to the officially recognised victims and for that reason as far as foreign victims are concerned can best be compared with the dutch b figures. one of the recommendations in the fifth report on human trafficking was that the registration of clients by the stv as it was then called should be improved. there were notifications in figures published from comensha s victim registration on march . trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur from the figures in the stv s annual reports. for some statistics reference is made to the annual reports. if so it is explicitly stated. . . country of origin table . contains the rankings of the five most common countries of origin of victims of thb for each year. table . ranking of the most common countries of origin of possible victims registered by comensha per annum country netherlands nigeria bulgaria romania china czech republic russian federation ukraine brazil as in the two preceding years the netherlands was the most common country of origin of victims of thb. nigeria bulgaria and romania were ranked second third and fourth posi tions they have occupied in different orders for the last three years. the previously identi fied emergence of china as an important country of origin stv nieuws is re flected in that country s entry as a newcomer in the top five in the table in fifth place. there are different nationalities represented among the victims registered with comen sha in . table . lists the most common nationalities. appendix table b . con tains a complete list of all nationalities in alphabetical order. the bnrm received a stv database which was naturally anonymous but could be broken down to individual victims for the first time for . this provided more insight into the limitations of the registration. accord ing to comensha the data reported here are the correct ones comensha e mail communication . the most recent year determined the order in which the countries are listed in the table. based on the nationality of the possible victims. a nationality is included if at least five victims were of that nationality in one or more of the years in the period from to . victims table . nationality of possible victims registered by comensha per annum nationality n n n n n albanian angolan belarussian brazilian bulgarian cameroonian chinese congolese czech dutch hungarian indian lithuanian moldavian moroccan nigerian polish romanian russian sierra leonean slovakian thai togolese turkish ukrainian yugoslav other unknown total in of the victims registered with comensha were from the netherlands. in that year there was an increase in absolute and percentage terms in the number of victims with brazilian chinese nigerian and polish nationality. there are still many victims from bulgaria but their share of the total declined. india appeared in the list for the first time in victims . the growth in the number and share of victims with moroccan and czech nationality reported in and did not continue. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur . . age table . contains the age distribution of the victims registered with comensha from to . table . age distribution of possible victims registered with comensha per annum age n n n n n n to years to years to years to years to years years and older unknown total source stv annual reports . as in the preceding years the majority of registered victims in were in the age group from to years. there was a striking increase in the number of registered under age vic tims particularly in the age group from to years. of the under age victims whose age and nationality are known were dutch were nigerian six were chinese six sierra leonean five bulgarian and four romanian. the other under age victims had different nationalities. . . gender there were men or boys among the newly registered victims in . five of them were minors two of whom were younger than . the countries of origin were with the number of men or boys from that country between brackets india china bangla desh nigeria and turkey each congo armenia azerbaijan bulgaria chile camer oon mauritania and sierra leone one each . the country of origin of one man is not known. five of the men were employed in prostitution the four chinese men worked in the hospitality industry but the largest number of cases nine men related to employment in agriculture and horticulture stv annual report p. . the proportion of under age victims varies from for bulgarian and romanian victims to for nige rian victims . six under age victims were of congolese moroccan or surinamese nationality two each and seven victims were armenian italian lithuanian mongolian russian or turkish respectively. victims the number of reports of male victims was far greater in than in previous years and is still increasing. this is probably due to the increased attention being given to exploitation outside the sex industry and the launch of investigations into thb in other sectors. in the newly registered victims included just two men both of whom were exploited in prostitution. one man or boy was reported in and none in . . . place of residence table . presents an overview of the place of residence of the victims registered in at the time they were reported. table . place of residence of possible victims at the time of registration with comensha place of residence women men total n n n independent reception facility aliens detention lodging on the street abroad departed for unknown destination country of origin hospital municipal mental health care institution closed facility other unknown total many of the victims reported to comensha are as far as is known living independently at the time of registration are staying in some form of reception facility and a substantial proportion are in aliens detention. the latter category includes a relatively large pro portion of men it covers of the men compared with of the women. the victims in men were registered in figures published from comensha s victim registration on march . oral communication from stv. aliens is placed between brackets but this group consists mainly of people in aliens detention. this would include closed accommodation for a victim of a loverboy. in most cases the place of residence is not known in some cases they are staying with parents. this latter option is in fact included as a separate category in the comensha registration data for information from co mensha by e mail and verbally . trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur detention also seem to include a relatively large proportion of nigerians at least . and of the victims in detention girls and boys are minors. . . further background information about the victims in comensha started using a computer system with various relevant background variables. after initial problems from it should have had more information than pre viously about registered possible victims but it is still proving difficult to retrieve this in formation so that much of the information is still lacking for many clients in . never theless it has again been decided to present some background characteristics that may be interesting. however since the following figures and percentages have to be regarded as minima due to the absence of many statistics they are not compared with the data for . of the victims registered with comensha in it is known that at least of the registered female victims have children. the children of of them live with their mother in the netherlands the children of twelve victims live elsewhere in the netherlands and those of victims live in the country of origin. it is not known where the children of the other victims are living source stv annual report p. of the female victims were pregnant at the time of registration of whom two were under age and were not this information is not known for the other . a relatively large number of the chinese women and girls were pregnant out of of the total of victims used drugs did not this is not known for the other victims were also exploited outside prostitution were not this not known for victims were offered a period for reflection. this represents of the victims that are known not to have dutch nationality. victims were not offered a reflection pe riod and the information is not known for the other non dutch victims. victims availed of the reflection period. this represents of the victims that are known not to have dutch nationality. victims reported the crime and did not. the reflection period had not expired for victims and for the others it is not known whether they reported the crime. source stv records this was in agriculture and horticulture victims the hospitality sectors victims household work vic tims within the marriage victims and in abattoirs victim . victims . victims in the b . . b applications and permit awards in the ind received b applications and granted permits. this is more than twice as many as in the previous year representing an enormous increase. it concerns a spe cific category of victims witness reporters of thb namely persons who are living illegally in the netherlands and are willing to cooperate with the police and public prosecution ser vice. it is not possible to calculate a percentage of permit awards from these figures since b applications are not all dealt with in the same year as the application. we refer to appendix for an explanation of the research and some additional explanatory notes to the data. . . age of persons with application for b table . presents the age distribution of victims witnesses who applied for or received a b in or . table . age distribution of persons with application for b and age b applications b applications b awards b awards n n n n to years to years to years to years to years years and older total as in the preceding year almost half of the persons for whom a b was requested or issued in were aged between and . given the sharp rise in the number of applications and awards in not surprisingly the absolute number of applications awards increased in almost every age category. in percentage terms the only substantial increase occurred in the to age group while the proportion of applications awards declined sharply among to year olds. in the applicants included under age persons and under age persons were awarded a b permit in the same year. among the under age persons some children of victims and children of witnesses were also registered incidentally and mistak enly as b applicants. the youngest child a boy is probably the child of a victim. one of the to year olds also a boy was probably also the child of a victim. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur . . gender of persons with application for b the expected shift in the gender of the victims more male victims as a result of the expan sion of the article in the law on human trafficking does indeed seem to be transpiring. whereas in the first year after the law was amended almost all b applicants were women in of the applicants were men. the b awards show a similar trend for men in and in . . origin of persons with application for b table . contains an overview of the most common nationalities of victims and witnesses that were awarded or applied for a b permit. there is a table with a complete list of all na tionalities in appendix table b . . table . nationality of persons with application for b and nationality applications applications awards awards n n n n bulgarian chinese nigerian polish romanian russian sierra leonean other unknown total in almost a quarter of the victims witnesses of thb for whom a b residence permit was requested or issued had nigerian nationality which represents an enormous increase compared with the previous year. this places nigeria at the top of the list of countries of origin of victims and witnesses in the b . romania ranks second in terms of applications and awards in followed by bulgaria which headed the list in . in table . the victims witnesses that were awarded or applied for b are classified accord ing to region of origin. in the table a distinction is made within europe where many of the victims come from between countries that were member states of the eu in coun tries that were members of the eu in or were candidates for membership of the eu at a nationality is included in the table if five or more victims witnesses who applied for were awarded a b pos sessed that nationality in at least one of the years and . as in and . nrm victims that time and joined in non eu countries in eastern europe and non eu countries in western europe. the other categories in the table are the different continents. table . region of origin of persons with application for b and region of origin applications applications awards awards n n n n eu eu new candidate member states non eu countries in eastern europe non eu countries in western europe africa latin america and caribbean asia unknown stateless total in both and the majority of the victims and witnesses for whom a b residence permit was requested or granted came from the countries that joined the eu in and africa and non eu countries in eastern europe. africa s share increased substantially in both absolute and percentage terms while that of the non eu countries in eastern europe declined particularly in relative terms. . . continued residence many victims and witnesses wish to remain in the netherlands on expiry of the b .nrm as reported in the fifth report on trafficking in human beings the ind s contact persons for human trafficking received applications for continued residence in of which in first instance equal numbers were accepted and rejected and . . compensation the fifth report on trafficking in human beings described the various methods by which vic tims of human trafficking can secure compensation for material or immaterial damage. one way for the victim is to join the criminal prosecution as an injured party. the victim s civil claim is then handled concurrently with the criminal case. the court can in addition to awarding the civil claim also impose a compensation order. the victim can ask for this but the court can also impose this sanction ex officio. in imposing a sentence the court can also only included in the table if persons who were awarded or applied for b came from there. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur attach a special condition that a sum of money has to be paid to the criminal injuries com pensation fund schadefonds geweldsmisdrijven or to another institution that represents the interests of victims of crimes. victims can also make a claim on the criminal injuries com pensation fund avail of mediation on the issue of compensation although this is not an obvious option given the nature of the crime or institute proceedings for compensation in civil court. data from the public prosecution service provide some information about the decisions on compensation in criminal and civil law cases. before presenting them table . first pro vides an overview of the number of perpetrators that were convicted of human trafficking alone or in combination with other offences in the period to and the sentences they received for more detailed information about this see chapter table . . table . sentences imposed after conviction for human trafficking per annum principal sentence no principal sentence only conditional principal sentence custodial sentence community service fine total table . contains information about the decisions if any that were made with respect to compensation in the above criminal cases. table . decisions on compensation decision on compensation none rejected declared inadmissible order to pay compensation partial award of civil claim order to pay compensation and partial award of civil claim total in applications were made to the fund by victims of human trafficking and applications were awarded. in other words cases in which charges of human trafficking were brought but there was no conviction are ig nored. these are unconditional sentences. victims although no compensation was awarded in more than half of the cases in in which de fendants were convicted of human trafficking there is clearly an upward trend in the sense that it is an issue that the criminal courts are being asked to decide on increasingly fre quently. this most frequently results in an order to pay compensation or in an order to pay compensation measure combined with the partial award of a civil claim. it has to be real ised however that this refers to the number of cases in which such judgments are rendered. the judgments can relate to more than one victim and vary with respect to different vic tims. it is not known how many victims actually received compensation on the basis of the above judgments nor what may have been solely or additionally claimed and received through the other channels of compensation. when there is a rejection declaration of non admissibility with respect to a particular victim and an order to pay compensation a partial award of a civil claim or a combination of both with respect to one or more other victims the judgment is classified one of these last three categories. suspects and convicted offenders . introduction this chapter contains statistics about persons suspected of thb whose prosecution for thb was registered with the public prosecution services pps . the number fluctuates from year to year and there were in . this chapter also contains data about offenders convicted of thb in first instance. this number also fluctuates from year to year and there were in . the information relates to their age gender and country of origin. the in formation about the suspects covers the period from to and the data about con victed offenders cover the period from the first year for which these data were avail able to . the information comes from the pps database. . age . . age of suspects table . provides an overview of the ages of suspects registered with the pps broken down by age group. table . age of suspects by year of registration age n n n n n younger than years to years to years to years to years to years to years n.a. legal entity unknown total in almost of the cases registered in the suspects were aged between and at the time of the first offence of thb. the average age of the suspects was sd . and the same person may be suspected of more than one thb offence. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur eleven suspects were minors which is more than in previous years in both absolute and relative terms. over the entire period from to the average age of the suspects was also sd . . the female suspects were on average slightly younger sd . . . . age of convicted offenders table . contains similar information about the age at the time of the crime of the persons convicted in first instance of thb in the period to . it is important to note here that the year in which an offence is registered by the pps is not always the same year as the court renders its verdict. for that reason the figures in the tables for registered and convicted per sons do not relate to precisely the same persons. in theory for example there may be more convictions of under age offenders than registered suspects who were under age at the time of the offence in a particular year. table . age of persons convicted of thb by year of conviction age n n n n younger than years to years to years to years to years to years to years unknown total of the persons convicted of thb in were aged between and years at the time of the first offence and four of the convicted offenders in that year were minors at the time of the offence. . country of origin . . country of origin of suspects over the entire period from to the suspects came from different countries. in each of the years between and the suspects came from or more different coun tries. in this respect surpasses every other year with suspects from different coun tries of birth. suspects and convicted offenders table . contains the rankings of the five most common countries of birth of suspects. an accent indicates that the countries concerned share the position in the rankings. table . rankings of the most common countries of birth of suspects by year of registration counry ranking ranking ranking ranking ranking netherlands turkey romania morocco bulgaria hungary surinam former soviet union albania the table shows that as in preceding years the netherlands ranks first as the country of birth of suspects and that turkey and romania maintain a stable position in the top five. table . contains a list in alphabetical order of the principal countries of origin of the sus pects. see table b . in appendix for a complete list. table . countries of birth of suspects by year of registration country of birth n n n n n albania bulgaria former czechoslovakia federal republic of germany hungary india iraq morocco netherlands netherlands antilles nigeria the most recent year is taken as the point of departure for determining the order in which the countries are listed in the table. the criterion used for inclusion in this table is that at least five suspects came from the country concerned in one of the years between to or at least ten came from that country in the entire period. the figures for the years to differ slightly from those in earlier reports due to corrections in pps data. since the discrepancies are minor they are not illuminated any further. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur continued table . country of birth n n n n n poland romania former soviet union surinam turkey former yugoslavia other unknown total as in preceding years the netherlands was the most common country of origin of suspects registered by the pps. turkey morocco bulgaria and romania also stand out as being rela tively frequently the country of birth of suspects more than of the cases . india is a strik ing newcomer in the list. reviewing the entire period from to besides the large proportion of dutch suspects there are also large percentages of suspects born in turkey bulgaria and romania. albania no longer seems important in this regard and the signifi cance of nigeria seems to be declining although the reports of arrests in thb cases at the end of and the beginning of raise the suspicion that this impression of nigeria s position as a country of origin of suspects may change again. . . country of origin of convicted offenders the previous section concerned the countries of birth of suspects of thb registered with the pps. table . contains a list of the five most common countries of birth of persons convicted of thb in the period from to . table . rankings of countries of birth of persons convicted of thb by year of conviction country ranking ranking ranking ranking netherlands morocco turkey former czechoslovakia some cases in in and in involved legal entities. suspects are not registered on the basis of ethnic background. once again the most recent year is taken as the point of departure for determining the order in which the countries are listed in the table. an accent indicates that the countries concerned share that ranking in the table. suspects and convicted offenders continued table . country ranking ranking ranking ranking bulgaria hungary romania surinam former soviet union albania the table shows that the netherlands consistently occupies first place as country of birth of convicted thb offenders and that turkey and bulgaria occupy a stable position in the top five. table . presents the most common countries of birth of persons convicted of thb. table b . in appendix contains a complete list. table . countries of birth of persons convicted of thb by year of conviction country of birth n n n n albania belgium bulgaria colombia former czechoslovakia federal republic of germany greece hungary indonesia marocco netherlands netherlands antilles nigeria poland romania former soviet union surinam thailand turkey only the countries of birth for which there was only a single instance in these years are omitted from the ta ble. they are lithuania and sudan iran korea and the us in and angola ghana great britain iraq cape verde kuwait and sierra leone . trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur continued table . country of birth n n n n former yugoslavia country unknown other total as in preceding years the netherlands was the most common country of birth of persons convicted of thb in . as in the case of registered suspects the former czechoslovakia and hungary are relatively common countries of birth of convicted offenders together with morocco turkey and bulgaria. over the entire period from to in addition to the fact that the overwhelming majority of convicted offenders are dutch a striking feature is the proportion of convicted offenders who were born in turkey bulgaria romania and morocco although the number of convictions of bulgarians romanians and to a lesser extent turks does seem to be declining. . gender . . gender of suspects most suspects are male in they accounted for of the total. the female suspects registered by the pps came from bulgaria romania the former soviet union each the netherlands morocco and brazil hungary hong kong india iran former yugo slavia lithuania nigeria poland and former czechoslovakia each . there are clear differences between the countries of origin. confining ourselves to the main countries of origin of suspects listed in table . what stands out is that the turkish suspects do not include any women and that there are few women among the dutch suspects while and respectively of the bulgarian and romanian suspects are women. whereas it was observed in the previous report that scarcely any of the moroccan suspects were women not more than to measured over the previous five years the figure in was of the suspects were women . although nigeria is no longer significant as a country of origin of suspects registered with the pps the number of women among nigerian suspects is worthy of mention of the suspects registered in the period to were women. convicted persons are not registered on the basis of ethnic background. suspects and convicted offenders . . gender of convicted offenders a review of the convictions for thb in shows that of the persons convicted in first instance were women. that is which is slightly more than the year before but similar to the situation in and . these women came from the netherlands mo rocco romania and former czechoslovakia each and bulgaria great britain hungary poland and thailand each . there are stark differences between countries in terms of the proportion of women among the convicted offenders. for the eight countries which ac counted for more than ten convicted offenders in the period from to the per centage ranges from albania to former soviet union . convictions of women for thb in in and in . the proportion of women among the persons convicted of thb from the other six countries is turkey netherlands and morocco surinam bulgaria and romania . prosecution . introduction this chapter presents the results of secondary analyses of the trafficking in human beings thb cases in the public prosecution service pps database for the period to . for each year the number of cases registered with the pps handled by the pps and dis posed of by the courts is given. in other words no cohort was followed. the research method is explained in appendix . with the entry into force of article a of the netherlands criminal code on january renumbered without amendment of the text as article f of the code in mid exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and certain activities relating to the re moval of organs were also brought within the definition of human trafficking . unfortu nately the text of the article makes it impossible to give an indication within the pps data of the nature of the exploitation on the basis of the sections and subsections of the article in the sex industry in other economic sectors or in relation to the disposal of organs . what we do know is that all cases up to the end of relate to exploitation in the sex industry and that several cases in involve exploitation in other sectors. none of the cases relate to the removal of organs. . thb cases registered with the public prosecution service . . number of registered cases in cases were registered with the pps in which human trafficking was solely or also suspected article ter old article a old article a old or article f . in the context of prosecution a criminal case is understood to mean a case against a single suspect. table . shows how many cases there were in each year and as far as is known how many of these cases also involved under age victims. these were again performed for this report by the statistical data and policy analysis division siba of the ministry of justice s scientific research and documentation centre wodc . including cases that were later dropped by the pps or in which the charges did not ultimately include thb. criterion registration under sections and subsections of the article which imply that the victims were under age. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur table . number of registered cases including cases also involving under age victims per annum year registered cases cases that also involve under age victims n n the number of registered cases fluctuates the small numbers of registered cases in and were followed by substantial numbers of cases in and . the number of cases that also involve under age victims also fluctuates in both absolute and relative terms the number declined in increased in and fell again in . over the entire period from to at least of all cases solely or also involved under age victims. this says nothing about the total number of under age victims since there may be more than one involved in each case. . . nature of the cases breaking down the thb cases registered with the pps according to the different sections within the articles on human trafficking in the criminal code produces the results shown in table . . table . type of thb by year of registration type of thb n n n n n ter a section ter a section a f section n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. a f section n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. a f section n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. f section n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. total under age victims may also be involved in cases registered under sections and subsections of the article other than those referred to in an earlier footnote. perhaps superfluously registration summons or conviction under article f section or concerns the aggravating circumstances under which thb is committed article f section . article ter a section article a section and article a f section are not mentioned in the table be cause there were no cases under those provisions in the period concerned. prosecution the vast majority of the thb cases in the period to concerned aggravated human trafficking these are cases in which two or more persons act in concert or there is a victim who is younger than years of age or serious physical injury is inflicted. non aggravated human trafficking also occurred fairly frequently in that period. in and five cases were registered under article a f section thb committed by two or more persons act ing in concert in which there was also a victim younger than involved and two cases were registered in under article f section human trafficking resulting in serious physi cal injury . the offence of thb is often committed in combination with other offences. a case may therefore involve more than one offence. table . provides an overview of the most serious registered offences in each thb case. table . most serious offence by year of registration most serious offence n n n n n sexual violence other violence crimes against property vandalism public order thb ter a section thb ter a section thb a section n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. thb a f section n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. thb a section n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. thb a section n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. n.a. other offences under the criminal code total in the last few years thb was the only or the most serious offence in around of the cases. in most of the cases in which there was another more serious offence in addition to such as arranging entry to the country for an illegal alien attempted rape or complicity therein possession or use of weapons attempted intentional deprivation of liberty or complicity therein and offences relating to drugs the production and use of false or forged travel documents and assault and duress.nrm nrm the classification adopted by statistics netherlands centraal bureau voor de statistiek in which the offence with the most severe potential punishment prevails has been modified by creating a separate category for thb. where there are combinations of offences with equal punishments thb is included in the list as the most serious offence. if there are then still several offences with the same potential punishment whichever of fence was committed earlier prevails. they involve for example thb in combination with fraud bribery of a public official making a false charge bigamy inducing a minor to drunkenness or abducting a minor.nrm trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur thb that offence usually involved a form of sexual violence. in sexual violence was the most serious offence in of cases involving thb. whereas the previous report identified a gradual decline in the registration of thb in combination with participation in a criminal organisation article of the criminal code to the point where it did not occur at all in that combination did occur again in on occasions in of the cases . it would therefore appear that resources are not or no longer being devoted mainly to cases designed to deliver a short sharp blow to per petrators and relating to suspects operating on their own a possible explanation that was put forward as a point of concern in the last report. . cases dealt with by the public prosecution service table . contains an overview of the number of cases by year of registration in which the suspect was remanded in custody. table . remand in custody by year of registration remanded in custody n n n n n yes no total in more than three quarters of the suspects were on remand at the time their case was brought before the court. this percentage has remained reasonably stable over the years. the previous sections involved cases registered with the pps. table . covers the cases dealt with by the pps in those same years. here too there are minor discrepancies compared with the figures presented in the previous report. the reason why more cases were dealt with by the pps than were registered with the pps in is that no cohort was followed and the pps does not always make a decision on whether to prosecute in the same year as a case is registered. once again there are minor discrepancies in this table compared with figures presented in previous reports. prosecution table . cases dealt with by the pps by year in which they were dealt with disposition of the case n n n n n thb summons unconditional decision not to prosecute summons for other offences transfer of jurisdiction joinder conditional decision not to prosecute out of court settlement total the number of cases dealt with by the pps displays a similar pattern to the number of cases registered with the pps was a peak year with cases dealt with. that was followed by a relative trough in with only cases dealt with whereupon the pps handled a substantially larger number of cases in . as in previous years the issuing of a summons was by far the most common manner in which cases were handled in in of the cases in . most summonses were is sued solely or jointly for thb some exclusively for other offences. the number of cases in which an unconditional decision was taken not to prosecute declined slightly to of the cases in . the decisions were based mainly on technical grounds the most common reason being a lack of evidence . prosecutions were unconditionally dropped more often in cases where non aggravated thb was suspected than in cases where there were aggravating circumstances. this refers to a summons solely or jointly for thb. these are cases in which despite an earlier suspicion of and registration under thb the summons ultimately did not include a charge of thb but did include charges of one or more other criminal offences. to another district or another country. joinder is the merging of different criminal offences into a single case. a conditional decision not to prosecute is a provisional postponement by the pps of the decision on whether to prosecute. an out of court settlement involves the voluntary payment of a sum of money to the pps whereupon the pps abstains from prosecuting. in non aggravated summonses for thb and unconditional decisions not to prosecute aggra vated summonses for thb and unconditional decisions not to prosecute. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur . settlement by the court to recapitulate in there were cases registered with the pps in which there was a suspicion of thb. in that same year the pps dealt with cases and the courts dealt in first instance with cases in which the charges included thb. table . give an overview of the judicial decisions by year in which the case was settled. table . settlement in first instance by year of settlement settlement n n n n n conviction acquittal discharge from further prosecution pps inadmissible cases joined at hearing total once again a large majority of the cases brought to court in led to a conviction . in of the cases there was an acquittal. the other forms of settlement did not occur at all in and only occasionally in the preceding years. . . sentence imposed for most serious offence table . gives an overview of the sentences imposed in first instance for the most serious offence in the charges. table . sentence imposed in first instance for the most serious offence by year of settlement most serious offence judgment thb ter a section conviction criminal code acquittal discharge from further prosecution cases joined at hearing total thb ter a section conviction criminal code acquittal cases that were registered with the pps as including thb but in which the summons was exclusively for other offences are therefore no longer included below. percentages are only given for cells with ten or more. prosecution continued table . most serious offence judgment pps inadmissible cases joined at hearing total thb a section conviction g n.a. n.a. n.a. criminal code acquittal n.a. n.a. n.a. total n.a. n.a. n.a thb a section conviction n.a. n.a. n.a. criminal code acquittal n.a. n.a. n.a. total n.a. n.a. n.a. thb a section conviction n.a n.a n.a criminal code total n.a. n.a. n.a. sexual violence conviction acquittal pps inadmissible cases joined at hearing total other violence conviction acquittal total crimes against conviction property total vandalism conviction public order total other conviction total total conviction acquittal discharge from further prosecution pps inadmissible summons annulled cases joined at hearing total trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur . . conviction for thb sentences imposed table . contains an overview of the sentences imposed in the cases in which the suspects were also convicted of thb. in other words cases in which a summons was served but there was no conviction for thb are ignored. table . sentences imposed by year convicted for principal sentence thb ter a section no principal sentence criminal code only conditional principal sentence custodial sentence community service fine total thb ter a section no principal sentence criminal code only conditional principal sentence custodial sentence community service fine total thb a f section custodial sentence n.a. n.a. n.a. total n.a. n.a. n.a. thb a f section custodial sentence n.a. n.a. n.a. that happened in of the cases in in which the summons did include thb and which resulted in a conviction. in this table there are also discrepancies compared with the figures presented in previous reports. some of them are substantial. these are unconditional sentences unless otherwise stated. an additional sentence may be imposed for example confiscation or a measure for example detention under a hospital order . contrary to what the term suggests the court can impose only an additional sentence arti cle section of the code of criminal procedure . the combination of a custodial sentence and a community service order is included in the category custodial sentence . this combination was imposed three times in the period to . combinations of a custodial sentence and a fine or a community service order are included in the category cus todial sentence . these combinations were imposed eight and twelve times respectively in the period to . the combination of a community service order and a fine is included in the category community service . this combination was imposed four times in the period to . the combination of a custodial sentence and a community service order is included in the category custodial sentence and was imposed once in . prosecution continued table . convicted for principal sentence criminal code community service n.a. n.a. n.a. total n.a. n.a. n.a. thb a section custodial sentence n.a. n.a. n.a. criminal code total n.a. n.a. n.a. total convictions no principal sentence only conditional principal sentence custodial sentence community service fine total custodial sentences in unconditional custodial sentences were imposed in of the aforemen tioned thb cases times in combination with an unconditional community service order or fine. the average term of the custodial sentence in ranged from just over months days sd for a conviction under article a f section an offence committed in con cert to roughly months days sd for a conviction under article ter a sec tion under age victims . perhaps more revealing is table . which shows the terms of custodial sentences broken down into different categories. percentages are only given where the subtotals are or more. table . terms of custodial sentences imposed per annum conviction for term of custodial sentence thb ter a section up to year criminal code to years more than year total thb ter a secion up to year criminal code to years more than years total thb a f section up to year n.a. n.a. n.a. the combination of a community service order and a fine is included in the category community service and was imposed once in . this is a sentence of life imprisonment for murder rape and other sexual offences in combination with thb . trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur continued table . conviction for term of custodial sentence criminal code to years n.a. n.a. n.a. more than years n.a. n.a. n.a. total n.a. n.a. n.a. thb a f section up to year n.a. n.a. n.a. criminal code to years n.a. n.a. n.a. more than years n.a. n.a. n.a. total n.a. n.a. n.a. thb a section up to year n.a. n.a. n.a. criminal code to years n.a. n.a. n.a. more than years n.a. n.a. n.a. total n.a. n.a. n.a. total up to year to years more than years total in almost half of the custodial sentences imposed in first instance were for less than one year. the table above relates to convictions for thb. reviewing the most serious offence for which an offender was convicted as in previous years the highest average custodial sentence in was imposed where violence was the most serious offence days sd or just over months. . appeal the pps data only contain information about the settlement of cases in first instance. it is also known whether an appeal was lodged in a case and by whom. table . provides an overview. this involves five cases in all. here too there are minor discrepancies compared with figures in the previous reports. prosecution table . appeal lodged by year of settlement in first instance appeal lodged n n n n n none only by public prosecutor only by suspect by both parties total the table shows that an appeal was lodged in of the cases in most often by the suspect either exclusively or as well as the public prosecutor. the percentage fluc tuates slightly over the years. the suspect naturally does so in the event of a conviction the public prosecutor does so most frequently in the event of an acquittal. bibliography this bibliography is an annex to the original dutch report not all references thus appear in the current english translation de nederlandse politie . korpsmonitor prostitutie mensenhandel. z.pl. z.uitg. gemeente amsterdam z.jr. . oud beroep nieuw beleid. nota prostitutie . amsterdam gemeente amsterdam. jonge van ellemeet h. . slecht werkgeverschap of moderne slavernij handhaving van een nader af te bakenen verbod. justiti le verkenningen . mantgem j. van e.a. . landelijke criminaliteitskaart . een analyse van misdrijven en verdachten op basis van gegevens uit hks. zoetermeer klpd dnri. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . mensenhandel derde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur. den haag bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . mensenhandel vijfde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur. den haag bnrm. stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . jaarverslag . amersfoort stv. stv . wat doet stv in de strijd tegen mensenhandel stv nieuws . vianen r. van e.a. . positie van slachtoffers van mensenhandel. e trendrapportage . utrecht verwey jonker institituut adviesbureau van montfoort. appendix thb provision in the dutch criminal code article f criminal code in force since january non official english translation any person who . by force violence or other act by the threat of violence or other act by extortion fraud deception or the misuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs by the misuse of a vulnerable position or by giving or receiving remuneration or benefits in order to obtain the consent of a person who has control over this other person recruits trans ports moves accommodates or shelters another person with the intention of exploiting this other person or removing his or her organs . recruits transports moves accommodates or shelters a person with the intention of ex ploiting that other person or removing his or her organs when that person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years . recruits takes with him or abducts a person with the intention of inducing that person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration in another country . forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to make him self herself available for performing work or services or making his her organs available or takes any action in the circumstances referred to under which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know will result in that other person making himself herself available for performing labour or services or making his her organs available . induces another person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration or to make his her organs available for remunera tion or takes any action towards another person which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that this will result in that other person making himself herself avail able for performing these acts or making his her organs available for remuneration when that other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years . wilfully profits from the exploitation of another person . wilfully profits from the removal of organs from another person while he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that the organs of that person have been removed under the circumstances referred to under . wilfully profits from the sexual acts of another person with or for a third party for remu neration or the removal of that person s organs for remuneration when this other per son has not yet reached the age of eighteen years . forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to provide him with the proceeds of that person s sexual acts with or for a third party or of the removal of that person s organs trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur shall be guilty of trafficking in human beings and as such liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties exploitation comprises at least the exploitation of another person in prostitution other forms of sexual exploitation forced or compulsory labour or services slavery slavery like practices or servitude. the following offences shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding eight years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties . offences as described in the first paragraph if they are committed by two or more per sons acting in concert . offences as described in the first paragraph if such offences are committed in respect of a person who is under the age of sixteen. the offences as described in the first paragraph committed by two or more persons act ing in concert under the circumstance referred to in paragraph under b shall be punish able with a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. if one of the offences described in the first paragraph results in serious physical injury or threatens the life of another person it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. if one of the offences referred to in the first paragraph results in death it shall be punish able with a term of imprisonment not exceeding fifteen years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. article is applicable mutatis mutandis. a fifth category fine is a fine of maximum as of januari appendix explanation of the research methods bnrm collects information in a variety of ways. this appendix briefly explains the research methods used. the b research objective and research questions in principle every year bnrm analyses the files provided by the immigration and naturali sation service containing records of all the applications for and awards of residence permits under the b regulation b residence permits . the research questions are for how many victims witnesses was a b residence permit applied for to how many victims witnesses was a b residence permit granted what are the background characteristics of persons who were granted a b residence permit research method at bnrm s request the ind the agency to which applications for residence permits un der the b regulation are submitted supplies files with records of all contacts with persons between and in which the b regulation played a role. in other words these files contain records of all applications for b residence permits initial applications and applica tions for an extension as well as all decisions to approve applications even if they were made later for example after an objection or appeal procedure and or the extension of a residence permit on other grounds . bnrm aggregated and consolidated all the files at a personal level. for various reasons that are explained in the fifth report on human traffick ingnrm this report in chapter only covers the years and . where they are relevant reference is made to the results for the period up to as pub lished in the rd report of the nrm. for the classification by year as before the automati cally assigned and therefore reliable entry date is used. reservations concerning the research the b data only relate to victims and witnesses of thb living illegally in the netherlands. after all it is only for them that it is necessary to suspend deportation pending the investiga tion and prosecution. the regulation provides for a temporary residence permit for both foreign victims and foreign witnesses who report human trafficking or have otherwise co operated in an investigation and prosecution. the ind does not register whether a person received a b residence permit as a victim or as a witness. trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur the pps data research introducion at bnrm s request analyses are carried out each year on part of the pps national database devoted to human trafficking which contains information provided by district offices of the pps about the prosecution of suspects. the analyses give an impression of the course of the proceedings in first instance. pps data contain information about cases and offences. by contrast with police investigations for the purpose of prosecution a criminal case is under stood to mean the case against a single suspect. criminal cases against individual suspects may involve multiple offences. the results of the research are presented in chapter sus pects and convicted offenders and chapter prosecution . objective and research questions the objective of the study was to provide insight into the prosecution of suspects of thb in the netherlands. the research questions were how many cases relating to thb were registered with the pps in how often are under age victims involved what is the breakdown of the suspects in terms of gender age and country of origin what is the breakdown of persons convicted of thb in terms of gender age and country of origin what offences other than thb are those persons suspected of how did the pps deal with cases in how did the courts settle cases in how often do the various parties lodge an appeal against judgments of the court what trends have occurred over time with respect to thb research method the cases in which thb is registered as one of the offences were selected from the overall pps database. the analyses do not follow a particular cohort. instead the analysis reviewed how many cases were registered and how many were dealt with by the pps or settled by the courts. additional remarks the pps data only include the principal charges in the indictment. furthermore if there are several principal offences in the charges only the first offence is registered in the pps data. this means not only that the pps data provide only a limited impression of the total number of thb offences namely that portion that comes to the attention of the police and is re ferred to the pps but also that the portion of the information that does reach the pps and the analyses are carried out by the statistical data and policy analysis division siba of the ministry of jus tice s scientific research and documentation centre wodc . this means that they are not necessarily always the same cases. appendix that may play a role in the course of the prosecution is not to be found in the pps data. it is not known how much information may be lost in this way. appendix notes to tables and statistics notes to tables this report contains a number of tables. these notes contain some remarks that are impor tant for the interpretation of the tables. due to rounding off the tables do not always come to precisely . to make the tables easier to read however the totals are always given as . if numbers are given in a column the letter n is used at the top of that column to denote the word number . in the tables a dash is used to indicate that the number is zero and that the associated per centage is . when the number is higher than zero but the percentage after rounding off is is used instead of a dash. notes to the statistics used averages are sometimes given in this report for example the average age of suspects in thb cases registered with the pps. in that case the number n see above and the standard de viation sd are also often given. the standard deviation expresses the extent to which the numbers over which the average is calculated differ. the higher the standard deviation the more they vary. appendix additional tables table b . nationality of possible victims registered with comensha per annum nationality n n n n n afghan albanian algerian angolan antiguan barbudan armenian azerbaijani belarussian belgian bengal beninese bosnian brazilian british bulgarian burundian cameroonian canadian chilean chinese colombian comorean congolese croatian cuban czech dominican dutch trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur nationality n n n n n ecuadorian egyptian eritrean estonian ethiopian finnish french georgian german ghanaian greek guinea bissauan guinean guyanese hungarian indian indonesian iranian iraqi irish italian ivorian jamaican kenyan kyrgyz latvian lebanese liberian lithuanian luxembourger macedonian malaysian appendix nationality n n n n n mauritanian mexican moldavian mongolian moroccan namibian nigerian north korean norwegian pakistani philippine polish portuguese romanian russian rwandan senegalese sierra leonean slovakian somali south african sudanese surinamese taiwanese tanzanian thai togolese tunisian turkish ugandan ukrainian uzbekistani trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur nationality n n n n n vietnamese former yugoslavian zimbabwean unknouwn total table b . nationality of persons with b application or permit and nationality applications applications awards awards n n n n albanian angolan armenian belarussian bengalese brazilian british bulgarian burundian cameroonian cape verdean chinese congolese croatian czech dominican estonian ethiopian guinean hungarian indian iranian iraqi italian appendix nationality applications applications awards awards latvian libanese lithuanian mauritanian moldavian maroccan nigerian nigerien north korean norwegian polish romanian russian senegalese sierra leonean slovak south african sudanese surinamese taiwanese tanzanian thai togolese turkish ugandan ukrainian uzbek vietnamese unknown stateless total trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur table b . countries of birth of suspects by year of registration country of birth n n n n n federal republic of germany afghanistan albania angola australia belgium brazil british borneo bulgaria cameroon cape verd china colombia former czechoslovakia egypt estonia france ghana great britain greece hong kong hungary india indonesia iran iraq korea kuwait liberia libya lithuania appendix country of birth n n n n n malaysia morocco netherlands netherlands antilles niger nigeria pakistan poland portugal former portuguese indies romania sierra leone somalia former soviet union sudan surinam thailand turkey uganda united states of america venezuela former yugoslavia former zaire country unknown n.a. legal entity total table b . countries of birth of persons convicted of thb by year of conviction country of birth n n n n albani angola belgium trafficking in human beings sixth report of the national rapporteur country of birth n n n n bulgaria cape verde colombia former czechoslovakia federal republic of germany ghana great britain greece hungary indonesia iran iraq korea kuwait lithuania morocco netherlands netherlands antilles nigeria poland romania sierra leone former soviet union sudan surinam thailand turkey united states of america former yugoslavia country unknown total colofon reference trafficking in human beings. supplementary figures. sixth report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bureau nrm july bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on thb p.o. box eh the hague the netherlands www.bnrm.nl tel fax production aolf legal publishers nijmegen tilburg layout jook van der snel bnrm 