 research brief vienna international centre po box vienna austria tel. fax www.unodc.org monitoring target . of the united nations sustainable development goals a multiple systems estimation of the numbers of presumed human trafficking victims in the netherlands in by year age gender form of exploitation and nationality foreword the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children and the united nations office on drugs and crime are proud to present a joint report on a multiple systems estimation of the number of presumed human trafficking victims in the netherlands. this joint venture was triggered by the need of the dutch national rapporteur to gain insight into the actual volume of human trafficking in the netherlands and is part of unodc s efforts to assist countries to monitor sustainable development goals indicator . . number of victims of human trafficking per population by sex age and form of exploitation . knowing the total number of trafficked victims detected and not detected helps the netherlands to tackle human trafficking more effectively while the development and application of an innovative methodology can serve as a tool for other united nations member states. since human trafficking is a hidden crime statistics on identified trafficking victims only reveal a small part of the problem and the actual number of victims can only be estimated through statistical techniques. for methodological and definitional reasons no comprehensive estimation of the true volume of presumed trafficked victims in the netherlands was available. with this new study the dark figure of trafficking in persons and the dark figure ratios of different groups of presumed victims has been revealed so more targeted policy interventions can now be implemented to improve the detection of and assistance to the most hidden populations. in the dutch context these include underage victims dutch victims and victims of trafficking for non sexual exploitation. by using multi year data and by including four relevant covariates into the model gender age nationality and form of exploitation the results are more robust and more stable over time than the previous multiple systems estimation published for the netherlands. a thorough scientific approach has been followed to compute the estimates presented in this document and we are confident that the results between and presumed victims per year of which about foreign presumed victims of sexual or non sexual exploitation approach the actual order of magnitude of trafficking in persons in the netherlands. presenting such figures is a great step forward in the field of trafficking in persons research which we hope can be taken up by many other countries so that ultimately a solid global figure on the total number of victims can be computed. while the estimates are based on a substantially improved mse methodology limitations still need to be considered. therefore we encourage the continuing development testing and validation of the mse methodology and its application to trafficking in persons. the development of this brief has been a unique and valuable experience for all parties involved. it has showed how close cooperation between methodological experts on multiple systems estimation and national experts on human trafficking and data collection is essential. we hope that this collaboration will incite other countries to initiate similar studies. our thanks go to prof. jan j.m. van dijk for initiating this important project and bringing together all the different parties and to dr. maarten cruyff and prof. peter g.m. van der heijden for their work in further developing the mse methodology and subsequently applying it to the data of the netherlands. corinne dettmeijer vermeulen dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children angela me chief research and trend analysis branch united nations office on drugs and crime monitoring target . of the united nations sustainable development goals a multiple systems estimation of the numbers of presumed human trafficking victims in the netherlands in by year age gender form of exploitation and nationality based on a contribution by jan j. m. van dijk maarten cruyff peter g. m. van der heijden and suzanne l. j. kragten heerdink executive summary in september united nations member states adopted the agenda for sustainable development. at the heart of this bold agenda are the sustainable development goals sdgs a set of goals aimed at stimulating action in a wide range of policy areas. trafficking in persons features prominently in the agenda as three of the goals include targets that specifically mention this crime. the measurement of crime in general and trafficking in persons specifically is challenging because much of the conduct remains undetected and unreported. while there is data on the number of reported cases of trafficking worldwide the dark or hidden figure remains unknown. the present paper explores the application of a recent methodology to generate a sound estimate of the dark figure of trafficking in persons. the hope is that such studies will be replicated in many countries so that the severity of trafficking can be monitored over time. the united nations office on drugs and crime is the guardian of the united nations convention against transnational organized crime and its supplementing protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children. the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children of the netherlands is one of the foremost national research centres on this topic. these two entities carried out a joint in depth pilot test of a promising methodology multiple systems estimation mse to estimate the total presumed yearly number of trafficking victims in the netherlands broken down by age sex form of exploitation and nationality. the key finding is that in and the most recent years for which records are available the total number of presumed victims of human trafficking in the netherlands was approximately per year. this means that the estimated numbers are four to five times higher than the recorded numbers of detected victims. abstract a multiple systems estimation mse was carried out using the statistics on possible victims identified by different groups of organizations reporting to comensha on behalf of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children over a period of six consecutive years . in total six different groups of organizations lists reported to comensha among which the border police. the presumed victims reported by the border police concern presumed victims of a particular type of trafficking that is not informed by the palermo protocol. moreover this type of trafficking is no longer upheld as human trafficking by the supreme court in the netherlands. for these reasons two log linear models were fitted one including those reported by the border police based on six lists concerning presumed victims between and and one excluding those exclusively reported by the border police based on five lists concerning presumed victims between and . to enhance the robustness of the estimates they were stratified by four covariates namely age minor adult gender female male form of exploitation sexual non sexual and nationality dutch non dutch . the key finding is that in and the most recent years for which records are available the total number of presumed victims of human trafficking in the netherlands was approximately six lists five lists per year. this means that the estimated numbers are four to five times higher than the recorded numbers of victims that come to the attention of the authorities. expressed as rates per persons the rate of presumed victims is about six five lists per inhabitants per year based on the estimates for and . the victimization rates are six five lists per adult dutch females per adult dutch males in both models six five lists per dutch girls between years old and in both models per dutch boys between years old . the rate of non dutch legal or illegal residents is six five lists victims per or about fifteen fourteen six five lists times higher than for dutch nationals per in both models . the challenge of counting victims of human trafficking in the united nations adopted the target to end abuse exploitation trafficking and all forms of violence and torture against children as target . of its agenda for comensha has been appointed as the official registration organization of all identified possible victims of human trafficking in the netherlands on behalf of the dutch national rapporteur. sustainable development under goal promote peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable development provide access to justice for all and build effective accountable and inclusive institutions at all levels . to monitor implementation of this target the un statistical commission s interagency and expert group on sdg indicators iaeg sdgs recommended among other indicators number of victims of human trafficking per population by sex age and form of exploitation. the united nations office on drugs and crime unodc has been identified as the custodian international agency responsible for the global reporting of the indicator and for providing support to member states to collect data on the indicator. in order to fulfill this commitment unodc has been working with member states and the academic community to develop methodologies to estimate the number of undetected victims of trafficking in persons. statistics on detected victims are routinely collected by statistical authorities across the world. these national statistics are periodically collated by international organizations such as unodc and eurostat and used by unodc as the basis for its biennial global reports on trafficking in persons glotip . however these statistics say very little about the true volume of trafficking in persons. they reflect just the tip of the iceberg. if the ratio between the recorded cases and the real numbers would as is the case with icebergs be roughly constant over time and across countries the numbers of recorded cases would provide useful information. in that case the true numbers could simply be multiplied by the constant factor to arrive at estimates of the true volume. unfortunately the presumption of th century criminologists of constant ratios between numbers of recorded and real cases of crime has proven to be untenable. the detection rates of law enforcement agencies show great variation both over time and across countries and so do consequently ratios between recorded crimes and total crimes and victims. rankings of countries in terms of recorded crimes per inhabitants often bear little or no relationship to the ranking of the real total crime numbers. many countries with high levels of corruption report very few arrests or convictions for corruption van dijk . this might also be the case with the offence of human trafficking. to give just one example taken from the glotip report of the netherlands population million registered about six five lists victims of human trafficking in whereas the united states of america population million a mere victims and japan population million . if these numbers were taken at face value the rate of trafficking victims per would in the netherlands be six five lists times higher than in the united states and six five lists times higher than in japan. even assuming that the netherlands would be faced with uniquely serious problems of exploitation an assumption for which there is no basis these comparative statistics beggar belief. more likely the lower rates in the united states and japan reflect a different level of detection and recording of victims. within the european union the rates of identified victims per reported to europol for vary between lows in portugal . germany . and sweden . to highs in the netherlands . bulgaria . and romania . eurostat . as revealed elsewhere this variation reflects differences in defining identifying and recording victims rather than in their actual numbers van dijk et al . the european rates show highly diverging trends in the numbers of identified victims between and as well. these changes over time too largely reflect changes in identification strategies and recording policies rather than in the volume of the crime eurostat . in publications on numbers of recorded crimes unodc and eurostat have warned against interpreting these statistics as measures of the true volumes of crime. in recent years eurostat has refrained from publishing statistics of identified victims per country altogether. clearly to monitor progress with sdg target . other international human trafficking statistics than the official figures of recorded victims are urgently needed. the estimation of statistics on undetected victims poses a formidable challenge known in criminology as the old problem of assessing the hidden figure of crime . criminologists have made headway with cracking the hidden figures through the conduct of annual surveys among the public about personal or household experiences with common types of crime. examples of such surveys include the national crime victims surveys in the united states addington rennison the national crime victims survey of england and wales jansson the national safety monitor in the netherlands smit van dijk and for comparative purposes the international crime victims surveys van dijk . unodc has developed standards to implement large scale victimization surveys and has been supporting countries to undertake victimization surveys unodc unece manual on victimization surveys . surveys to explore the hidden figure of trafficking in persons are more complex than general victimization surveys. some have experimented with survey methodology to collect data on forced labour including trafficking in persons for forced labour ilo . gallup international has designed and tested a standardized questionnaire which is used as module in its annual world poll. in this questionnaire respondents are asked about forced labour victimization experiences of themselves or family members over the past year. the first survey results in a sample of developing countries have revealed some limitations. unlike burglary or street mugging the crime of human trafficking forced labour tends to be statistically rare and more deeply hidden in the population at large. general victimization surveys on common crimes produce victimization rates of on average per cent per year. the first surveys conducted by gallup int. and others produced prevalence rates for non sexual exploitation far below per cent. the reliable estimation of annual changes in this phenomenon per country will require large sample sizes and concomitant budgets. also with such small numbers of identified victims little can be said about the nature of trafficking cases or the characteristics of the victims. in the western world the challenges are even bigger since exploitation seems heavily concentrated among hard to find migrant workers especially in the case of labour exploitation zhang abraham van dijk . to complicate matters further the first batch of gallup surveys detected almost no cases of sexual exploitation. respondents seemed reluctant to report cases of sexual exploitation experienced by themselves or family members. data collection about sexual exploitation through interviewing may prove to be very challenging in many countries if not impossible due to endemic feelings of fear or shame among respondents. measuring sexual exploitation just like measuring domestic violence through surveys requires the use of highly trained interviewers and special interview techniques which will be hard to sustain on a large scale across the world. in conclusion data on numbers of detected victims provide little or no information on the true numbers of total victims and when presented in a comparative perspective can easily lead to fundamentally flawed conclusions. research using sample population surveys may cast light on the true extent of forced labour in developing countries but not on the volume of sexual exploitation. with current methods the sdg proposed indicator on numbers of victims disaggregated by sex age and form of exploitation is unlikely to be comprehensively reported through survey research alone. an international definition allowing a range of interpretations in the past efforts of the united nations to collect international statistics on crime were hampered by the lack of internationally recognized definitions of even the most common types of crime such as household burglary robbery and assault united nations . more recently the development of the international classification of crime for statistical purposes iccs has enhanced the collection of comparable crime data although it will take time for all countries to fully implement the classification. trafficking in persons is among the few types of crime for which a treaty based international definition exists. most national counter trafficking legislation is largely based on recently adopted international instruments particularly the united nations protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons. this so called palermo protocol adopted in the year has to date been ratified by countries. article a of the palermo protocol provides the basis for much national legislation trafficking in persons shall mean the recruitment transportation transfer harbouring or receipt of persons by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion ... for the purpose of exploitation. in this definition one recognizes a threefold structure for trafficking in persons to be constituted it is necessary to prove an act with a means and with a purpose of exploitation. the means used in the process of trafficking can be non violent in nature such as deception or abuse of a person s position of vulnerability. furthermore article b of the palermo protocol states that consent on the part of the victim is irrelevant if one of the means in article a is used. finally articles c and d of the palermo protocol codify that in the case of a victim younger than eighteen years there is no need to prove the use of a means . despite this widely shared definition the national legal definitions of human trafficking in national criminal codes and in particular their interpretations still differ greatly between countries aromaa dutch national rapporteur esser and dettmeijer vermeulen gallagher unodc unodc unodc . one of the reasons might be that key aspects of the palermo protocol definition including the element of purpose of exploitation are not uniformly interpreted and therefore may not be consistently applied in different jurisdictions unodc unodc unodc . although the palermo protocol definition has been duly incorporated in the criminal codes of a large number of countries the international comparability of statistics on identified human trafficking is still hampered by considerable variation in the national definitions and interpretations. because this publication is about the estimated number of victims in the netherlands it is important to reflect on the dutch interpretation of the palermo protocol definition of human trafficking. the netherlands applies a relatively broad interpretation both with regard to the element abuse of a position of vulnerability as well as with regard to the element of purpose of exploitation esser and dettmeijer vermeulen . therefore it is to be expected that the number of identified cases as well as the estimation of the total number of victims is protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the united nations convention against transnational organized crime available at http www.unodc.org unodc en treaties ctoc index.html higher than in countries with a more restrictive interpretation. moreover while the dutch definition article f of the dutch criminal code dcc is predominantly based on the palermo protocol it is not solely based on it. article f dcc includes aspects that are not informed by the palermo protocol and are based on an older international instrument. for instance article f dcc considers the recruiting taking or abducting of a person with the intention of inducing that person to make himself or herself available for prostitution in another country. until recently neither means nor the intention of exploitation was required. however in the dutch supreme court ruled that the intention of exploitation is actually a latent part of this subsection of the dutch definition. this means that since this ruling the dutch definition of human trafficking changed and has become narrower. national laws of other countries may contain similar historical peculiarities in their definitions of human trafficking that go beyond the palermo protocol. this further compromises international comparisons. for reasons of international comparability and because the particular type of trafficking under article f dcc is no longer upheld as human trafficking by the supreme court in the netherlands this paper presents estimated numbers of victims both including and excluding the victims of this particular type of trafficking reported by the kmar the dutch border police see hereafter . national referral systems and multi source datasets as explained above both the measurement of the hidden figures of human trafficking through population surveys and the lack of uniformity in the definition of human trafficking pose formidable methodological challenges for the collection of international statistics on this type of crime. on a more positive note estimating the true volume of human trafficking is favored by one unique feature of data collection on human trafficking victims namely the involvement of a variety of different institutions besides the police. this multi agency involvement flows directly from the victim centeredness of the palermo protocol which stipulates that the fight against human trafficking must be equally focused on the arrest and punishment of offenders and providing protection and assistance to victims. victims of human trafficking should be allowed to remain temporarily or permanently in the country the international convention for the suppression of the traffic in women of full age . supreme court may ecli nl hr . which emphasizes the prominent role of national judges in the interpretation of the trafficking definition esser and dettmeijer vermeulen and the fact that national definitions of human trafficking are not univocal comparable over time. where they are identified and should be offered protection and assistance. this dual focus on punishment and protection calls for the involvement of other organizations besides police and border control in the identification of victims. as prescribed in the united nations model law against trafficking in persons governmental and non governmental organizations should play a supporting role in the identification of victims enabling them to reach out to victims and offer assistance to them independently of action by law enforcement authorities. in europe national multi agency referral and identification systems involving all relevant actors have for years been promoted by inter alia the organization for security and economic co operation in europe osce odihr . consequently in many western and eastern european countries national multi agency systems of identifying and supporting victims known as national referral mechanisms nrms have duly been put in place. for example in the united kingdom dedicated ngos municipal agencies and the police work together to identify persons who are entitled to special services and protection as possible victims of human trafficking. in the netherlands a coordinated approach to consistently protect possible victims of human trafficking that have been identified by the different relevant actors organizations like the national police the royal netherlands marechaussee rnlm in dutch kmar further the border police ngos municipal institutions et cetera has been in practice for years already. the formal establishment of an official nrm is currently under development following the eu directive on human trafficking and the european commission s strategy towards the eradication of trafficking in human beings and subsequently the recommendation of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children further dutch national rapporteur dutch national rapporteur . the primary aim of multi agency identification and referral mechanisms is to assure that all victims including those who are reluctant to cooperate with the police are duly offered protection and support. a positive side effect of such mechanisms is that their administrative records can provide comprehensive statistics on all persons identified as victims by any of the organizations in the country participating in an nrm or equivalent arrangement. in europe eurostat in its questionnaire on human trafficking specifically required member states to report on the organizations that provided data regarding registration of victims and to indicate the procedures used to collect the data eurostat . in the police are the principal source for the registration of victims in fifteen member states. six member states available at http www.unodc.org unodc en legal tools model treaties and laws.html. provided data originating from ngos three member states from border guards and two from immigration services . labour inspectors were reported in one member state. the category others as registration source included victim support units hungary prosecutors lithuania iom international organization for migration poland the netherlands romania social services united kingdom romania reception centres finland prisons united kingdom local authorities regional councils the netherlands united kingdom . the possibility that the same persons might be counted twice or more by different reporting organizations complicates the collection of aggregated statistics. for example in germany and austria the police and the ngo community maintain parallel data systems of the numbers of victims they have identified. it is certain that many victims identified by the police have received services from ngos and vice versa but the extent of the overlap is unknown. for this reason the numbers of victims recorded by the police and the ngos cannot be added up for a total count. the victims reported to eurostat by germany and austria are therefore derived from the databases of the national police only and miss out on victims exclusively identified by ngos. in order to arrive at more comprehensive counts controlling for double counting of the same victims the collation of data from all relevant sources has in many countries been commissioned to single entities. examples include the united kingdom human trafficking centre ukhtc of the british home office the government funded ngo coordination centre for trafficking in human beings dutch acronym comensha on behalf of the dutch national rapporteur the centre for the protection of human trafficking victims in serbia and the ministry of interior in romania. units responsible for these statistics have for some time promoted the use of unique identifiers in the data collected from the various contributing organizations while safeguarding data protection standards. whereas the gathering of statistics on trafficking victims from different organizations was initially seen as a factor complicating statistical analyses the recording of persons belonging to the same hidden population by different organizations now proves to be an asset for the estimation of the dark figures. the existence of multiple lists of identified victims have in fact become a useful tool to develop methodology based on the capture recapture approach to estimate total number of victims. in ilo researchers applied capture recapture analysis using two teams of researchers identifying cases of forced labour from public sources to estimate the global numbers of forced labour victims at any time ilo . however despite the fact that the methodology of this estimate was innovative in the context of human trafficking at the time there were still significant reservations dutch national rapporteur gould . the dutch national rapporteur emphasized in this context the importance of combining the substantive knowledge of professionals engaged in the fight against human trafficking and statistical expertise dutch national rapporteur especially on methods to estimate the scale of hidden populations. in at an expert meeting on researching hidden populations approaches to and methodologies for generating data on trafficking in persons convened by unodc prof peter van der heijden elaborated on the potential of multi source data systems for estimating the true numbers through various techniques van der heijden et al . he explained the advantages of using three or more different registers in the estimation models as practiced in mse. in a team of researchers under the leadership of prof. bernard silverman chief scientist of the home office in london actually applied mse to the integrated multi source dataset on persons identified as possible victims of human trafficking in the united kingdom in silverman bales et al . this exercise was replicated in the netherlands with the data comensha collected in on behalf of the dutch national rapporteur van dijk and van der heijden . the following section first describes how mse works illustrated by the british and dutch studies just mentioned. then the results of an mse of the total number of victims detected and undetected in the netherlands are presented disaggregated by age sex form of exploitation and nationality per year for the period between and using an integrated multi year dataset with four covariates provided by the dutch national rapporteur. the alternative of multiple systems estimation mse the statistical technique to estimate the volume of hidden populations known as capture recapture analysis multiple systems analysis or multiple record systems analysis was originally developed by biologists to estimate animal populations. although the precise historical origins of the technique are disputed danish marine biologist johannes petersen is often credited with the early use of the capture recapture method to estimate the sizes of fish populations. the quintessential idea to estimate the number of fish in a pond is as follows. one catches a number of fish say tags them and then throws them back into the same pond. some time later one takes a new catch say another from the same pond and counts how many of the second catch are tagged as being part of the returned original first catch. if the overlap between the two catches is zero or very small this suggests that the population of fish in the pond is much larger than . if the overlap is considerable say this suggests that the population is smaller. the larger the overlap the smaller the size of the fish population. if of the fishes in the second catch are tagged it follows that tagged fishes in the pond had a chance of one in five of being caught. assuming that the non tagged fishes have similar catchment chances the total number of fishes in the pond can be estimated at of which untagged. the capture recapture approach of biologists has translated into a well known method for estimating the size of a hidden human population using two independent recording systems or registers which partially list its members. linking the individuals in the two registers allows for the estimation of the number of individuals that are not recorded in any of the registers. for example with two registers a and b linkage gives a count of individuals in a but not in b a count of individuals in b but not in a and a count of individuals in both a and b. the counts form a contingency table denoted by a b with the variable labeled a being short for inclusion in register a differentiating between the categories yes and no and likewise for register b. the statistical problem is to estimate the value in the cell no no . an estimate of the total population size is obtained by adding the estimated count of doubly missed individuals to the counts of individuals found in at least one of the registers. the capture recapture method has been successfully applied to estimate the size of hidden human populations by determining the overlaps between unique individuals appearing in separate recording systems or lists . using such capture recapture analysis estimates have for example been made of the numbers of casualties of human rights violations in peru and irregular migrants in the netherlands lum price banks van der heijden et al . capture recapture analysis depends on certain assumptions about the lists and the population from which they are drawn. arguably the most problematic condition to fulfill when using recording systems of human individuals is the condition that recording systems are independent of each other. in the case of records of persons this assumption of independence of lists is usually not met. for example persons identified by law enforcement authorities as possible victims of human trafficking are likely to be referred to social assistance programs and they consequently have a higher probability of being included in the recording systems of the involved ngos. in this case the inclusion in the list of a service provider is far from independent from registration by the police. this is an example of positive dependence. since such positive dependence increases the overlap between the two lists the number of the unobserved population is consequently underestimated. in practice negative dependence may also occur for example when inclusion in one register lowers the chance of being registered in another register which leads to an overestimation. a promising approach to relax the condition of independence is to include a third register or multiple registers and to analyze the three way or multiple way contingency tables. with three or more lists the independence assumption in the two list case is replaced by the less severe assumption that three or more factor interaction is absent. in official statistics this extension of the two list capture recapture method is known under the name of multiple systems estimation mse . in the united kingdom the obligation to identify presumed victims of human trafficking is discharged by the nrm a framework for identifying victims and ensuring they receive appropriate protection and support. its datasets are managed by the united kingdom human trafficking centre ukhtc of the home office. the national crime agency nca of the home office collates data from various sources to produce strategic assessments of presumed victims. in unique presumed trafficking victims were identified. the information about presumed victims came from a large number of separate source organizations. this information can be summarized into five lists based on the source type la local authority ng non governmental organization pf police force national crime agency go government organization mostly home office agencies e.g. uk border force gangmasters licensing authority gp the general public through various routes of the victims included in the database some appeared on two and a few on three or four of the five lists. table shows the distribution of the identified victims over the five lists. table contingency table for the national crime agency strategic assessment data source silverman . each column shows the number of cases which fall in the combination of lists indicated by the cells marked. columns corresponding to patterns which do not occur in the observed data are omitted. the bottom row of table gives the numbers of presumed victims falling under each of the possible categories. mse allows an estimation of the number of individuals not appearing on any of the lists given the distribution of individuals in the contingency table. this is done by assuming that each of the counts is derived from a poisson distribution a distribution for the occurrence of rare events. a restrictive poisson log linear model is estimated for each of the cells and the parameter estimates are projected on the cell with the non appearing or hidden individuals baillargeon rivest . with log linear modeling it is possible to assess how much being on one particular list affects a person s chances of being on another. possible interactions between lists can be detected and controlled for in the estimates. the condition of independence can therefore be relaxed. bales hesketh and silverman fitted a log linear model to the data in table which allows for individual list effects and also for interaction between lists. the estimated number of victims was . the per cent confidence interval for the actual population size was estimated as between to including the victims already known. this suggests that the strategic assessment was aware of roughly per cent to per cent of all possible victims in the uk in . in round numbers therefore the dark figure is around to . there is a positive correlation between list la and each of lists ng and pf so that being known to the local authority apparently increases the chance of being known to ngos or the police. this may reflect the existence of referral pathways for potential victims between these agencies in particular in relation to minors who unlike adults do not need to consent to referral to the nrm or joint operations between the local authorities and other agencies. the upshot of the exploratory mse carried out on the lists of the national crime agency is that the true number of victims during is estimated at or four times the numbers of detected victims . the case of the netherlands in the netherlands comensha has been appointed as the official registration organization of all identified possible victims of human trafficking on behalf of the dutch national rapporteur. ideally all possible victims identified by any organization or person in the netherlands should be reported to comensha. institutions authorized to carry out criminal investigations into human trafficking are the national police comprising ten regional police districts and one central police unit coming across all forms of trafficking the border police typically coming across cross border sex trafficking and the inspectorate social affairs and employment inspectorate szw typically coming across cases of labour exploitation. there is no legal obligation for these institutions to report victims they have identified to comensha but they are strongly urged to do so. in addition designated regional coordinators and other governmental as well as non governmental institutions such as organizations providing services to victims migrants prostitutes specifically organizations providing social or legal services and youth welfare agencies are invited to report on all cases of presumed victimization. finally concerned citizens or even victims themselves can identify possible victims and report them to comensha directly. although this system has been in place for several years already and reporting and registering has steadily improved it can still not be assumed that every identified possible victim in the netherlands is always duly reported. in order to report to comensha the organizations persons that come across potential victims should be capable of identifying possible victimization be capable of recognizing and interpreting signals be aware of comensha as the national registration organization be willing to report to comensha acknowledge the importance of reporting youth welfare agencies are much more reluctant to report to comensha than for example service providing organizations specialized in human trafficking victims and be able to report to comensha with regard to consent of the presumed victim to reporting that is currently required for privacy reasons especially when it concerns minors . these are not constant omnipresent factors they vary per organization person per region in time et cetera and might constitute possible limitations in mse based estimation. in the comensha registration covering a total of uniquely defined cases were registered once or more. in roughly one in eighteen cases victims have been reported by more than one organization usually two and in a few cases three. many of the theoretically possible combinations of two lists occurred. using this contingency table van dijk and van der heijden applied log linear models to estimate the dark figure of victims not recorded on any of the lists. six lists were used p national police k border police i inspectorate szw r regional coordinators o residential treatment centers and shelters z others for example ambulatory care centers organizations providing legal services immigration and naturalization service . a model search was carried out using the stepwise selection procedure of the r package step. this procedure is similar to well known stepwise regression analyses that is it starts with a simple model and includes significant and deletes non significant interaction terms between the lists until the fit of the model to the data is deemed adequate. in table the first five models are reported. the standard approach for goodness of fit assessment of these models is to evaluate the chi squared value based on the deviance in combination with the degrees of freedom through the aikake information criterion aic or the bayesian information criterion bic . considering the relatively large sample size of cases the bic was chosen which better prevents overfitting. for the data at hand the goodness of fit assessment of the bic model is still problematic because of the many empty cells there are no observations for certain combinations of registers as a result of which the chi squared approximation does not hold. as an alternative the parametric bootstrap was used to simulate the chi squared distribution and determined the p value of the model as percentile in the simulated distribution. random samples were simulated under the fitted model to estimate the distribution of the pearson chi square and took the percentile of the chi square of the fitted model as the p value. for example the third model in table m has a chi square value of and the pearson values of approximately simulated samples were larger than this value which corresponds to per cent. this shows that the m fits adequately because per cent is larger than the significance level of per cent. a first analysis looked at a model assuming independence of all lists model m . this model showed an inadequate fit the p value is smaller than . . in subsequent models interactions have been fitted between the residential treatment centers and shelters and others and between the inspectorate szw and others. models m and m showed better fits with the latter having a p value above . . models fitting more interactions proved to be overfitting that is they were more complicated than necessary to describe the data well which may result in unstable estimates. the fit of model is adequate p . and the p values of models and are not substantially better. therefore model and were ignored. the preferred model was the model fitting the interactions between the residential treatment centers and shelters and others oz and between the inspectorate szw and others iz . table results of log linear modelling of six lists of human trafficking victims in the netherlands estim confidence interv. pearson p m . p r k o i z . m . p r k oz i . m . p r k oz iz . m . r k op oz iz . m . k pr op oz iz . source van dijk van der heijden . as can be seen the preferred model gives an estimate of about victims. these victims include the recorded by comensha. the estimate suggests that roughly ten per cent of all victims were detected. or in other words that there were approximately ten times more victims present on the dutch territory in the course of than those recorded. the per cent confidence interval ranges from approximately to . a model with six or five lists four covariates and data from six years as discussed above one of the agreed global statistical indicators for sdg target . to end abuse exploitation trafficking and all forms of violence against and torture of children consists of the number of victims of human trafficking per disaggregated by sex age and form of exploitation. the proposed disaggregation serves inter alia to inform anti human trafficking policies. victims of cross border sex trafficking are typically identified by border police units during transportation while entering the netherlands . during exploitation victims of sexual exploitation dutch or non dutch are typically identified by special police forces and service providing ngos. victims of forced labour are mostly identified by inspectorates for fair healthy and safe working conditions or ngos advancing migrant rights. underage victims can be detected by a variety of organizations including youth welfare agencies. ideally each of these institutions needs to be informed about the total numbers of victims identified and non identified and on the proportions of potential clients reached by them. the disaggregation of estimated numbers of undetected victims by gender age form of exploitation and nationality does not only serve important policy purposes but can also as will be explained hereafter improve the overall estimates themselves. a well documented complication of the mse method is that the likelihood of persons to be listed or included can vary across subgroups of the population. in the analogy of estimating numbers of fishes some species might have larger chances of getting caught than others. if these subgroups probabilities are structurally different the condition of homogeneity of inclusion chances is violated. in such cases estimates based on average probabilities might result in erroneous estimates van der heijden et al. van der heijden et al. . the phenomenon of human trafficking manifests itself in a multitude of different forms. four main types can be distinguished internal trafficking for sexual exploitation cross border trafficking for sexual exploitation internal trafficking for non sexual exploitation and cross border trafficking for non sexual exploitation. each of these sub types might have different capture inclusion probabilities. for example dutch victims of sexual exploitation may have different capture inclusion probabilities than non dutch victims of labour exploitation because inter alia different sets of organizations are involved in their identification kragten heerdink dettmeijer vermeulen korf . the condition of homogeneous inclusion probabilities on at least one of the lists can be approximated by stratification of the analysis according to relevant covariates. if for example certain categories of victims are more likely to be recorded than others estimates can and should be made for each of these groups of victims separately van der heijden et al . for policy purposes the comensha registration includes the covariates age sex form of exploitation experienced by the victim for example sexual services forced labour or forced crime and nationality. in the reports of the dutch national rapporteur the numbers of victims presented are broken down by these variables. in the initial study using the data on identified victims the modeling did not as presented above include any covariate. the note that according to kragten heerdink dettmeijer vermeulen korf the different types of trafficking are based on the form of exploitation sexual or non sexual times the route of trafficking based on the country of recruitment and the country of exploitation internal or arrived departed traversed cross border . because in the netherlands the registration of the country of recruitment and the country of exploitation is for the most part lacking the route of trafficking is based on the nationality of the victims instead. this is legitimate because dutch victims are all predominantly victims of internal trafficking and non dutch victims are all predominantly victims of cross border trafficking. however note that nationality country of origin can only determine the route of trafficking internal or cross border in countries where cross border trafficking exclusively predominantly involves cross border trafficking from other countries to the country in question i.e. arrived cross border trafficking instead of also from the country in question to other countries i.e. departed cross border trafficking . present round of estimations of the total number of victims detected and undetected incorporates in the log linear models the covariates male female adult minor sexual exploitation other forms of exploitation and dutch non dutch. in order to increase the number of cases and to explore changes over time of the estimated numbers of victims detected and undetected data on presumed victims from six consecutive years up to have been incorporated. an integrated dataset with these variables was prepared by the dutch national rapporteur. as mentioned before see an international definition allowing a range of interpretations the dutch definition of trafficking included a type of trafficking that is not informed by the palermo protocol under article f dcc the recruiting taking or abducting of a person with the intention of inducing that person to be available for in brief prostitution in another country while no means nor the intention to exploitation is required. research into the human trafficking case files of the border police conducted by the dutch national rapporteur showed that the victims reported to comensha by the border police predominantly concern presumed victims of this particular type of trafficking nationaal rapporteur . to allow for better international comparisons and because this type of trafficking without the requirement of any means or the intention of exploitation is no longer upheld as human trafficking by the supreme court in the netherlands two mse based models were developed. in the first analysis all reported presumed victims in the period were included and used the same six lists as before p national police k border police i inspectorate szw r regional coordinators o residential treatment centers and shelters z others such as ambulatory care centers organizations providing legal services and immigration and naturalization service . in the second analysis the presumed victims who were solely reported by the border police were excluded and therefore used five of the aforementioned six lists excluding k border police concerning reported presumed victims in the period . figure shows the trends in the numbers of presumed victims reported to comensha by the six organizations just mentioned. supreme court may ecli nl hr . in total presumed victims were reported to comensha in nationaal rapporteur . victims were excluded because the reporting organizations were not registered. figure numbers of presumed victims reported to comensha by six organizations or sets of organizations during the years figure shows at a glance that the national police reported the largest part of all victims in all years. the second feature that catches the eye is that the numbers reported by the national police peaked in and and the numbers reported by the border police in . after the numbers reported by the national police and by the border police have both moved downwards. in order to give further insight in the statistics underpinning the model table presents the distribution of the victims over the six lists broken down to the occurring combinations. in the far right column the frequencies are given for the victims that were not solely reported by the border police. table contingency table for comensha registration on presumed victims i inspector ate szw k borde r police o residential centers shelt ers p nation al police r regional coordinato rs z other s frequen cy n frequen cy n x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x x each row shows the number of cases which fall in the combination of lists indicated by the cells marked. rows corresponding to patterns which do not occur in the observed data are omitted. the cells in the bottom row of table show the totals recorded by each of the six sets of organizations. by far the largest numbers are recorded by the national police and the border police. the cells in the column frequency n show the total number of cases falling into each of the occurring combinations. the largest categories of victims are those exclusively listed by the national police the border police the regional coordinators and others . the most common pairwise combinations were national police and others national police and regional coordinators national police and residential centres shelters residential centres shelters and others and national police and border police . it is noticeable that of the cases reported by the border police only or . per cent have been co recorded by another organization mainly the national police . there is little overlap between the cases recorded by the border police and those recorded elsewhere. this validates the aforementioned observation that the border police identifies and reports a different type of trafficking than the other five reporting organizations that is a particular type of trafficking that is not informed by the palermo protocol and is no longer upheld as human trafficking by the supreme court in the netherlands. between and the cases exclusively reported by the border police showed a pronounced curved trend. these cases amounted to only and in and respectively. thereafter they went up to in in and in . subsequently they decreased to in . the sudden rise in reported cases by the border police is explained by the fact that in the border police considerably stepped up its efforts to identify presumed victims of the aforementioned particular type of trafficking. the recent drop in has probably to do with increased attention required by other established priorities for example human smuggling at the expense of available capacity to identify signals of human trafficking nationaal rapporteur . the model selection procedure was basically the same as for the models presented in table . the model search started with a simple model and included interaction terms until the fit of the model to the data became adequate. as explained this time the additional variables age l sex s exploitation u nationality n and year q were included. the variable q comprises polynomial variables from the st to th degree which model potential trends in the main effects of and interactions between the registers and covariates over the years. the missing values on the covariates age sex exploitation and nationality were imputed using the em algorithm van der heijden et al. . in the step procedure the bic was again preferred over the aic as the selection criterion because of its protection against overfitting when the sample is relatively large and an additional restriction on the parameters of the model was imposed. given that many pairs of registers show little or no overlap over the six year period see table the factor interaction parameters for such pairs of registers and the variable q with the five polynomials for modelling trends over time are numerically unstable in the sense that they lead to highly inflated population size estimates and confidence intervals. to protect against this type of inflation the restriction that only factor interactions are allowed to enter the model was imposed. this restriction implies that no corrections are made for possible higher order interactions between the lists. evaluation of the fit of the selected model by empirically generating the distribution of the pearson chi square statistic using the parametric bootstrap with samples shows that the step procedure selects a model that may be underfitting the p value is . . however it should be noted that the observed n is rather large with or cases and it is well known that with such large n even minor misspecifications make a test for model fit significant. therefore the per cent criterion is not rigorously applied but rather the current model is chosen as its fit is adequate in the light of the large n. the model with six lists concerning presumed victims that was selected as the most parsimonious one is presented in table a and the model with five lists concerning presumed victims in table b. table a parameters in the selected model with six lists kp kr kz ko rz iq kq oq rq zq uq nq iu il in is kn ks ku kl ol zl un zn on oz ou pn pu ru sl sn su ln lu pl rl os zs table b parameters in the selected model with five lists rz iq oq rq zq uq lq iu il in is ol zl un zn on oz ou pn pu ru sl sn su ln lu pl rl os zs the first row in both tables show the interactions between registers for which corrections have been made. as explained interactions between lists can be both positive and negative. notice that in table a this part of the model is considerably more complicated than the model for . this may simply be due to the fact that a larger number of observed cases makes it easier to detect such interactions n in versus n in and the inclusion of covariates. the model in table b is similar to the model in table a it includes the same interactions except of course the negative interactions between list k border police and others but does lead to slightly lower estimates for some years see for example figure a and b . see van dijk j.j.m. and p.g.m. van der heijden research brief. multiple systems estimation for estimating the number of victims of human trafficking across the world. vienna unodc. results overall figure a and b shows in black the trend in the total presumed victims recorded by comensha and in red the total estimated numbers of victims. the per cent confidence interval around the estimates is depicted in shaded red. figure trends in observed presumed victims and estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists in figure a the numbers of observed presumed victims depicted at the bottom show a peak at about in . the trend line of estimated total victims does roughly mirror the one in observed cases. the trend lines however seem to show some divergences. unlike the observed numbers the estimated numbers seem to have jumped up between and . the downward trend from onwards is steeper in the estimated numbers than in the observed cases. in figure b the clear peak in observed presumed victims is absent which means that this peak in figure a is the result of observed presumed victims of the particular type of trafficking reported by the border police. however in figure b the trend line of the estimated total seems to peak in and as in figure a in although the peak is a bit lower figure a about versus figure b about . as opposed to the peak in the observed number in in figure a the peak in the estimated number in in both figure a and b is therefore probably not exclusively related to the inclusion of the aforementioned particular type of trafficking reported by the border police. as discussed the earlier one year model for without covariates produced an estimate of with confidence intervals between and . the new fuller and more complex model estimates the totals of victims in at around . the new estimate is considerably lower than the older estimate and falls outside its per cent confidence interval. the difference is partly explained by the inclusion of more years in the model which may have smoothed the findings. the second probable explanation is the use of covariates in the new model. this explanation was put to the test by replicating the six year model without covariates. this simpler model produced estimates per year that indeed differed considerably from those of the full model see appendix a for results for all years . for the year the new estimated number was . for this year the multi year model without covariates apparently produced a higher estimate than the fuller model. observed and estimated numbers as shown in table the estimated numbers of presumed victims are five to six times higher than the numbers of observed victims see appendix a for full data . table ratio between estimated and detected victims six lists . . . . . . five lists . . . . . . over the period of the hidden figure of trafficking victims seems to have declined somewhat according to both analyses. an mse using covariates provides insight in the ratios between estimated and observed presumed victims per group. the ratios for up to for the subgroups of victims of sexual exploitation and of non sexual exploitation are shown in tables and see appendix a . table ratio between estimated and detected victims of sexual exploitation six lists . . . . . . five lists . . . . . . table ratio between estimated and detected victims of non sexual exploitation six lists . . . . . . five lists . . . . . . on average the ratios between estimated and observed cases were . six lists . five lists times higher for presumed victims of non sexual as for those of sexual exploitation. in other words the hidden part of non sexual exploitation in the netherlands mainly consisting of labour exploitation is . . times higher than that of exploitation in the sex industry. figure conveys the results graphically observed cases represented by dotted lines . figure trends in observed presumed victims and estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by form of exploitation sexual other a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists a b figure a and b conveys first that the numbers of estimated cases of sexual and non sexual exploitation seem to follow different trends. cases of sexual exploitation show a curved trend with a peak in . cases of non sexual exploitation seem to have peaked in . the ratios between estimated and observed cases are consistently smaller for sexual exploitation than for non sexual exploitation over the years. the trend lines of observed and estimated numbers of non sexual exploitation in figure a correspond to those in figure b. the lines for sexual exploitation show some differences. as opposed to figure a the number of observed cases does not clearly peak in in figure b. furthermore the number of estimated cases of sexual exploitation in seems higher in figure b than in figure a. these estimated cases of sexual exploitation seem to peak in in both figure a and b although the peak in figure b is a bit lower. next possible differences between the ratios between estimated and observed cases for the covariates of sex age and nationality have been examined. in the model based on six lists the relative dark figures of male victims are comparable to those of female victims on average out of . male victims is observed and out of . female victims . in the model based on five lists however the relative dark figure of female victims out of . female victims is observed is higher than that of male victims out of . male victims is observed . the results also show that the ratios between estimated and observed cases are . six lists . five lists times as high for underage victims as for adult victims. the victimization of minors of both sexual and non sexual exploitation seems to be more hidden than that of adults. finally the dark figure ratios for dutch and non dutch nationals is considered separately. these results show that non dutch victims are . six lists . five lists times as likely to be detected or at least reported than dutch victims for full results see appendix a a a and a . estimations disaggregated by sex age form of exploitation and nationality before portraying the other key results in graphs first the breakdowns of the estimated total numbers of victims by sex age form of exploitation and nationality are presented below in a summary table table . in every cell two numbers are presented the first number represents the estimate based on the model with six lists and the second number the estimate based on five lists. since the numbers of victims in these subcategories of underage victims are very small the results have not been included. table mse based estimates based on respectively six and five lists of the population of presumed victims of human trafficking in the netherlands in x totals and disaggregated by year sex age form of exploitation and nationality first figure refers to six list and second figure to five lists female male minor adult sexual other dutch non dutch total . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . the results given in table indicate a strong overrepresentation of females among the estimated total numbers of victims in all years. since the numbers of female victims have declined as opposed to the number of males. the estimated numbers of underage victims fluctuate around per year in both models . their proportion of the total is on average per cent six five lists . the estimated numbers of victims of non sexual exploitation also centered around in the period . in these years the proportion of victims of non sexual exploitation has increased somewhat from per cent six lists per cent five lists in to per cent six lists per cent five lists in . finally it can be observed that dutch victims are in the majority with the exception of in the model with six lists when the numbers of non dutch victims surpassed those of dutch victims. in comparison to the estimated numbers based on the model with six lists the first numbers given in each cell the estimated numbers based on the model with five lists the second numbers include as from less females adults victims of sexual exploitation and non dutch victims the latter with the exception of . this corresponds to the fact that the particular type of trafficking reported by the border police by definition concerns cross border trafficking for sexual exploitation which involves predominantly female victims because of the required element of sexual exploitation adults and non dutch because of the required cross border element . graphs with estimated rates the following figures will graphically present the trends in estimated numbers of the various subgroups defined by age sex form of exploitation and nationality for absolute numbers see appendices a to a . figure above showed the separate trends for sexual and non sexual exploitation. these will not be repeated. figure depicts the trends in female and male victims. the distribution according to gender roughly resembles that of form of exploitation with few male victims of sexual exploitation. the per cent confidence intervals are shown in shaded colours. figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by sex female male a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists as expected the trend lines in both figure a and b of female victims closely resemble the ones for sexual exploitation. the estimated numbers of female victims seem to have peaked in and thereafter gradually declined to the level in . the estimated numbers of male victims seem to have remained fairly stable over the years although the trend lines in both models show a peak in that relates to the estimated cases of non sexual exploitation see figure a and b . the trend line of male victims in figure a corresponds to that in figure b. the trend lines of females however show some differences. in figure b the number of estimated females seems higher and as expected in comparison to figure a figure b shows as from somewhat fewer female victims. figure shows the separate trends in estimated numbers of adult and underage victims. figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by age minor adult a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists on average underage victims make up at least a quarter of all victims in both models varying between per cent in and per cent in and based on the model with six lists and between per cent in and per cent in based on the model with five lists. the trend lines of estimated numbers of adult victims roughly mirror the curved trend in victims of sexual exploitation discussed above. the trends in underage victims seem to show less variation. the two trend lines in figure a largely correspond to those in figure b with the exception that adults peak in according to figure b instead of in as in figure a and minors peak in according to figure b instead of in as in figure a . as expected in comparison to figure a figure b shows as from somewhat fewer adult victims. the next figures figure a and b show the results for the four demographic subgroups defined by the covariates of sex and age. figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by sex female male and age minor adult a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists the disaggregation by age and sex reveals that both adult and underage victims of human trafficking are predominantly female. the trend line of adult females confirms the now familiar curve with peaks in five lists and six lists . as expected in comparison to figure a figure b shows as from somewhat fewer adult females. the numbers of girls also seem to have peaked in in the model with six lists but based on the model with five lists in as opposed to adult females. the subcategories of males seem to have stayed fairly stable over the years although the trend lines of adult males in both models seem to show a peak in that relates to the peak of estimated cases of non sexual exploitation see figure a and b . figure shows the results for the subgroups defined by sex and form of exploitation. figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by sex female male and form of exploitation sexual other a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists figure confirms that female victims of sexual exploitation make up the bulk of all victims in all years and seem to have peaked in . the estimations indicate that the victims of sexual exploitation are rarely males only per cent in both models . numbers of such victims represented by the blue line seem to have remained at a very low level in all years. male and female victims of non sexual exploitation seem to show very similar trend lines with a peak in which relates to figure a and b . as expected in comparison to figure a figure b shows as from somewhat fewer female victims of sexual exploitation. figure depicts the separate trends in estimates of victims of sexual and non sexual exploitation disaggregated by age. figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by age minor adult and form of exploitation sexual other a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists figure shows that the estimated numbers of the four categories of victims defined by age and form of exploitation each followed somewhat different trends. estimated adult victims of sexual exploitation mostly comprising females seem to have peaked in and adult victims of non sexual exploitation in which relates to figure a and b . the numbers of estimated underage victims of both sexual and non sexual exploitation for example trafficking for criminal activities or forced begging seem to show less pronounced changes over time since . however both trend lines in figure a seem to follow those of adult victims in a somewhat flattened way underage victims of sexual exploitation show a small peak in also relating to the peak of girls in figure a and underage victims of non sexual exploitation in . as expected in comparison to figure a figure b shows as from somewhat fewer adult victims of sexual exploitation. estimations disaggregated by nationality as explained the estimation model included the covariates mentioned in the relevant indicator of the sdg target . age sex and form of exploitation . in the netherlands a large part of presumed victims of sexual exploitation recorded in recent years are dutch victims of internal trafficking for sexual exploitation nationaal rapporteur . for the reasons mentioned before the dutch national rapporteur suggested to include as fourth covariate the dichotomous variable dutch nationals non dutch nationals. figure shows the observed and estimated numbers of presumed victims for the years disaggregated by nationality for details see appendix a . figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by nationality dutch non dutch a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists figure shows that the estimated numbers of presumed victims with dutch nationality seem to have peaked in which relates to sexual exploitation see figure a and b . this confirms the assumption mentioned before below figure about the peak in not being exclusively related to the particular type of trafficking reported by the border police concerning female adult non dutch victims of trafficking for sexual exploitation . instead it turns out to be mostly related to female dutch victims of sexual exploitation . the numbers of estimated victims with non dutch nationality show the by now familiar peak in and relating to non sexual exploitation see figure a and b . as expected in comparison to figure a figure b shows somewhat fewer non dutch victims except for . figure shows the trends in the four categories defined by the variables nationality and form of exploitation. figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by sex female male and nationality dutch non dutch a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists the results indicate that the estimated numbers of dutch victims peaked in whereas the non dutch victims peaked in and see figure . this finding highlights the peaking of the numbers of dutch female victims in and of non dutch female victims in and . the numbers of non dutch male victims also seem to have peaked in thereby contributing to the overall peak of non dutch victims in that year. as expected in comparison to figure a figure b shows somewhat fewer non dutch female victims. figure shows the results for dutch victims of sexual exploitation non dutch victims of sexual exploitation dutch victims of other forms of exploitation and non dutch victims of other forms of exploitation. figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by form of exploitation sexual other and nationality dutch non dutch a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists the results in figure a show that dutch victims of sexual exploitation seem to have peaked in non dutch victims of sexual exploitation in and non dutch victims of non sexual exploitation in . figure b shows similar trends and as expected somewhat fewer non dutch victims of sexual exploitation. finally below are the breakdowns of the estimated numbers by age and nationality. figure trends in estimated totals of presumed victims in the netherlands by age minor adult and nationality dutch non dutch a based on model with six lists b based on model with five lists the results show that adult non dutch victims seem to have peaked in and and according to the model based on six lists dutch victims both adults and minors in . according to the model based on five lists however adult dutch victims seem to have peaked in and and minor dutch victims in just as minors in figure b minor females in figure b and minor victims of sexual exploitation in figure b . as expected in comparison to figure a figure b shows as from somewhat fewer non dutch adults. conclusions and discussion the present study builds on the exploratory multiple systems estimation mse by silverman and bales of the total numbers of presumed victims in the united kingdom in based on data collected by various organizations and the exploratory estimation of the numbers of presumed victims in the netherlands recorded in van dijk and van der heijden . in the netherlands data on presumed victims are systematically reported by both involved state agencies and relevant ngos to the ngo comensha on behalf of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children. in the dutch context the concept of a presumed victim is defined as a person showing any signs of having possibly been trafficked exploited according to the broad definition of trafficking applied in the netherlands. persons with such status are entitled to special services and when irregularly on the territory protection from expulsion. in order to make the estimates more robust firstly all presumed victims identified by different organizations and reported to comensha over a period of six consecutive years have been included . in total six different groups of organizations lists reported to comensha among which the border police. the presumed victims reported by the border police concern presumed victims of a particular type of trafficking that is not informed by the palermo protocol. moreover this type of trafficking is no longer upheld as human trafficking by the supreme court in the netherlands. for these reasons two log linear models have been fitted one including those reported by the border police based on six lists concerning presumed victims and one excluding those exclusively reported by the border police based on five lists concerning presumed victims . secondly to enhance the robustness of the estimates they have been stratified for covariates with possibly different inclusion chances namely age minor adult sex female male form of exploitation sexual other and nationality dutch non dutch . the incorporation of these covariates allows the calculation of one of the official indicators for sdg target . namely . . the number of victims per inhabitants disaggregated by sex age and form of exploitation. in addition the model allows the calculation of estimated numbers of dutch and non dutch victims. the key finding of this analysis is that in and the most recent years for which records are available the total number of presumed victims of human trafficking in the netherlands was approximately six lists five lists per year. expressed as rates per population the rate of presumed victims is about six five lists per inhabitants per year. disaggregated rates for sex age and nationality should be calculated not per inhabitants but per inhabitants of the relevant population groups. the rates per year based on the estimates for and are victims six five lists per adult dutch females and per adult dutch males in both models . assuming that no or very few victims of human trafficking in the netherlands are younger than years of age the victimization rates of minors are six five lists per dutch girls between years old and in both models per dutch boys between years old . the rate of non dutch legal or illegal residents is six five lists victims per or about fifteen fourteen six five lists times higher than for dutch nationals in both models per . according to statistics netherlands in dutch cbs in there were legal residents with a dutch or a non dutch nationality in the netherlands and van der heijden cruyff and van gils estimated that there were about illegal residents in the netherlands in the twelve month period july up to and including june which makes an estimated total of residents dutch and non dutch legal and illegal . according to statistics netherlands in there were legal residents with a dutch nationality in the netherlands victimization rate of six five lists per of the total dutch population of which adults victimization rate of six five lists per of the total adult dutch population females and males. according to statistics netherlands in there were minors of twelve years or older with a dutch nationality in the netherlands victimization rate of six five lists per dutch minors of twelve years or older which is seven nine six five lists times higher than for dutch adults girls and boys. according to statistics netherlands in there were legal residents with a non dutch nationality in the netherlands and van der heijden cruyff and van gils estimated that there were about illegal residents in the netherlands in the twelve month period july up to and including june which makes an estimated total of legal and illegal non dutch residents. furthermore there are about legal and illegal non dutch adult residents victimization rate of six five lists per of which females and males victimization rates of six five lists per legal and illegal non dutch adult females and six five lists per legal and illegal non dutch adult males and about legal and illegal non dutch minors of twelve years or older victimization rate of six five lists per of which girls and boys victimization rates of six five lists per legal and illegal non dutch girls of twelve years or older and six five lists per legal and illegal non dutch boys of twelve years or older . in all years female victims of sexual exploitation made up the largest part of the estimated total numbers of victims of human trafficking. however these numbers seem to have somewhat declined since . almost all victims of sexual exploitation are females on average per cent in both models and even the majority of victims of non sexual exploitation are females on average about per cent is female in both models . the estimates indicate that male victims in the netherlands are mostly victims of non sexual exploitation. only about a quarter of all males are victims of sexual exploitation and they seem to account for only per cent of all victims of sexual exploitation. however since there is only a small number of observed male victims of sexual exploitation the estimate for this subgroup has relatively large margins of error. furthermore it is concluded that underage victims make up more than a quarter of the total number of victims. the estimated number of dutch and non dutch minors victimized by either sexual or non sexual exploitation is in and at six five lists per persons in the age group of years staggeringly high. finally the study showed that in recent years among presumed victims of human trafficking dutch nationals are in the majority. interpreting trends the estimates of the total numbers of presumed victims during show a curved trend. the numbers jumped from about in both models to six five lists in and reached a plateau at six five lists in . thereafter the numbers dropped to six five lists in six five lists in and six five lists in . this curved trend roughly mirrors the movement in recorded victims including the victims reported by the border police see figure a . note that the numbers of recorded victims excluding the victims exclusively reported by the border police present a more or less steady line without clear peaks. the apparent estimated peaks in and based on these observed cases model with five lists therefore do not mirror the number of recorded victims excluding the victims exclusively reported by the border police see figure b . the increase in the estimated number of victims in in both models seems for a large part per cent per cent related to an increase in the estimated number of adult non dutch victims of non sexual exploitation both females and males. the peak in the estimated number in based on the model with six lists seems only to a limited extent accounted for by an increase in female adult non dutch victims of sexual exploitation. female dutch victims of sexual exploitation both minors and adults seem to be mostly accountable for the estimated increase in . also in the model with five lists female dutch victims of sexual exploitation both minors and adults seemed to increase. however this did not result into a considerable increase in the total number of victims in this year for this increase did not as opposed to the model with six lists surpass the decrease in the number of victims of non sexual exploitation. in conclusion the most recent available estimates of the total number of presumed victims of human trafficking in the netherlands are the ones for and namely six five lists and six five lists respectively or approximately six five lists victims on average per year as discussed above. since respectively six five lists and six five lists presumed victims were recorded in and this means that the estimated totals in the netherlands of approximately six five lists and six five lists are four to five times higher than the recorded numbers see appendix a for details . dark figure ratios mse using models with covariates provides insight in the ratios between estimated and observed victims of the different subgroups. the findings reveal that this ratio is consistently over the years considerably higher for cases of non sexual exploitation than for sexual exploitation appendix a . cases of non sexual exploitation in the netherlands mainly consisting of labour exploitation in agriculture the leisure industry construction or the domestic sphere are apparently more hidden than exploitation in the sex industry. the results also show that the exploitation of minors is in general less likely to be recorded than that of adults appendix a . the policy implication of these results on the differential hidden figures is that the relevant organizations notably the inspectorate szw and youth welfare agencies in the country should step up their efforts to detect and report cases of labour exploitation and the exploitation of minors respectively. finally the results indicate lower detection rates for dutch nationals than for non dutch nationals. this finding calls for sustained efforts of inter alia the dutch police to detect cases of internal trafficking for sexual exploitation of dutch women and girls. the way forward the inclusion of covariates such as age sex form of exploitation and nationality is recommended for policy reasons. anti trafficking policies should ideally be informed by data on the separate trends in various sub categories of human trafficking and in trends in the varying detection rates dark figure ratios per category. the breakdowns according to form of exploitation sexual or non sexual and route of trafficking internal or cross border in the case of the netherlands determined by nationality offer the possibility to improve international comparisons of estimated numbers by equalizing the definition of trafficking victims in these respects. if for example a country excludes victims of internal trafficking from its definition both its recorded and mse estimated numbers of victims will be relatively low compared to those of other countries which cover exploitation of nationals. mse cannot control for the use of widely divergent definitions of presumed or identified victims. international comparisons could be restricted to a common denominator such as the estimated numbers of victims of cross border trafficking for sexual exploitation. although such post hoc corrections in comparative mse estimates seem feasible to some extent further harmonization of definitions of human trafficking should remain a priority in future efforts to produce comparable international statistics regarding sdg target . van dijk van der heijden . the inclusion of covariates where available is also important to increase the robustness of the overall estimates per country. the current estimate for of six lists victims in the netherlands is considerably lower than the older estimate of based on a one year model without covariates also based on six lists . a replication of the new multi year model without covariates also produced an estimate for considerably above . these diverging findings suggest that inclusion of covariates such as age sex form of exploitation and nationality does as expected lead to different and more accurate estimates. the multi year results also show that estimates based on models incorporating covariates are more stable over time. for technical reasons inclusion of these covariates is therefore to be recommended in future mse based estimations of the numbers of trafficking victims to the extent that the available numbers of recorded cases allow for it. note that nationality country of origin can only determine the route of trafficking internal or cross border in countries where cross border trafficking exclusively predominantly involves cross border trafficking from other countries to the country in question instead of also from the country in question to other countries . the estimates of a model without covariates are consistently different from those of more complex models though not necessarily always higher see appendix a . the results also suggest that the use of larger multi year samples although complicating the fitting of the models ultimately produces more robust results. in countries were no historical data are available multi year models can be developed incrementally by replicating mse studies in the future. the overall recommendation for future studies is to use where possible multi year datasets with the covariates age sex and form of exploitation. in countries where both nationals and non nationals are subject of anti trafficking policies the covariate of nationality should also be included. a requirement for the use of such complex models seems to be the availability of relatively large datasets. when using large datasets the use of bic for model selection and bootstrapping is recommended for assessing the goodness of fit of the models. in the goodness of fit assessment the requirement that p values are higher than . can be relaxed in order to avoid overfitting. references abraham m. j.j.m.van dijk measuring forced labour victimization among bulgarians in the netherlands a pilot study commissioned by the ilo amsterdam dsp groep. addington l.a. c.m. rennison us national crime victimization survey in weisburd d. g. bruinsma eds encyclopedia of criminology and criminal justice new york springer. aromaa k. trafficking in human beings uniform definitions for better measuring and for effective counter measures. in savona e.u. and stefanizzi s. eds measuring human trafficking complexities and pitfalls new york springer. baillargeon s. and l p. rivest rcapture loglinear models for capture recapture in r journal of statistical software . . bales k. o. hesketh b. silverman modern slavery in the uk how many victims significance . dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children trafficking in human beings visible and invisible a quantitative report . the hague dutch national rapporteur. dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children trafficking in human beings ninth report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague dutch national rapporteur. esser l.b. c.e. dettmeijer vermeulen the prominent role of national judges in interpreting the international definition of human trafficking. anti trafficking review . eurostat statistical working papers trafficking in human beings edition luxembourg publications office of the european union. gallagher a.t. the international law of human trafficking. new york cambridge university press. gould a.j. from pseudoscience to protoscience estimating human trafficking and modern forms of slavery second annual interdisciplinary conference on human trafficking . . ilo global estimate of forced labour results and methodology geneva international labour organization. international working group for disease monitoring and forecasting capture recapture and multiple record systems estimation i history and theoretical development american j epidemiol. nov . jansson k. british crime survey measuring crime for years london home office. klaver j. leun j. van der a. schreijenberg preliminary study improper use of the residence scheme for victims of human trafficking regioplan beleidsonderzoek university leiden section criminology wodc full text in dutch . kragten heerdink s. l.j. c.e. dettmeijer vermeulen d.j. korf more than just pushing and pulling conceptualizing identified human trafficking in the netherlands. crime delinquency. advance online publication. doi . . lum k. m. e. price d. banks applications of multiple systems estimation in human rights research the american statistician . nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel en seksueel geweld tegen kinderen mensenhandel in en uit beeld ii cijfermatige rapportage . den haag nationaal rapporteur. dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children trafficking in human beings visible and invisible ii a quantitative report . nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel en seksueel geweld tegen kinderen monitor mensenhandel cijfers mogelijke slachtoffers . den haag nationaal rapporteur. dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children monitor trafficking in human beings figures on possible victims . osce odihr national referral mechanisms joining efforts to protect the rights of trafficked persons a practical handbook warsaw. silverman b. modern slavery an application of multiple systems estimation. gov. uk. smit p.r. j.j.m. van dijk history of the dutch crime victimization survey s in d. weisburd g. bruinsma eds encyclopedia of criminology and criminal justice . united nations report on the state of crime prepared by the secretariat . unodc issue paper abuse of a position of vulnerability and other means within the definition of trafficking in persons. vienna united nations. unodc . global report on trafficking in persons unodc new york united nations publication sales no. e. .v. unodc issue paper the role of consent in the trafficking in persons protocol. vienna united nations. unodc issue paper the concept of exploitation in the trafficking in persons protocol. vienna united nations. van der heijden p.g.m. j. whittaker m. cruyff b. bakker r. van der vliet people born in the middle east but residing in the netherlands invariant population size estimates and the role of active and passive covariates the annals of applied statistics vol. no. . van der heijden p.g.m. m. cruyff g.h.c. van gils schattingen illegaal in nederland verblijvende vreemdelingen . wodc. estimations of illegal residents in the netherlands . van der heijden p.g.m. de vries i. b hning d. cruyff m. estimating the size of hard to reach populations using capture recapture methodology with a discussion of the international labor organization s global estimate of forced labour in kangaspunta k. ed. forum on crime and society special issue researching hidden populations approaches to and methodologies for generating data on trafficking in persons . van der heijden p.g.m. zwane e.n. hessen d.j. . structurally missing data problems in multiple list capture recapture data. advances of statistical analysis pp. p. . van dijk j.j.m. the world of crime breaking the silence on problems of security justice and development across the world. thousand oaks ca sage. van dijk j.j.m. van der knaap l.m. aebi m.f. campistol c. counting what counts tools for the validation and utilization of eu statistics on human trafficking. prismaprint tilburg. van dijk j.j.m. the case for survey based comparative measures of crime. european journal of criminology . van dijk j.j.m. and p.g.m. van der heijden research brief. multiple systems estimation for estimating the number of victims of human trafficking across the world. vienna unodc. zhang s. x. trafficking of migrant laborers in san diego county looking for a hidden population. san diego ca san diego state university. appendices appendix a population size estimates x based on model with four covariates and on model with six registers only model with covariates model without covariates . . . . . . . . . . . . appendix a observed and estimated presumed victims and ratio estimated observed for totals and by form of exploitation sexual non sexual observed totals lists observed totals lists estimated totals lists estimated totals lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . observed sexual lists observed sexual lists estimated sexual lists estimated sexual lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . observed non sexual lists observed non sexual lists estimated non sexual lists estimated non sexual lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . in some cases the reported observed frequencies slightly diverge from the observed frequencies in the data. e.g. the reported observations sum to instead of in the case of lists and to instead of in the case of lists . this is due to rounding error when imputing missing values on the covariates. appendix a observed estimated and ratio estimated observed presumed victims by age minor adult observed minor lists observed minor lists estimated minor lists estimated minor lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . observed adult lists observed adult lists estimated adult lists estimated adult lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . appendix a observed estimated and ratio estimated observed presumed victims by nationality dutch non dutch observed dutch nationals lists observed dutch nationals lists estimated dutch nationals lists estimated dutch nationals lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . observed non dutch nationals lists observed non dutch nationals lists estimated non dutch nationals lists estimated non dutch nationals lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . appendix a observed estimated and ratio estimated observed presumed victims by sex female male observed female lists observed female lists estimated female lists estimated female lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . observed male lists observed male lists estimated male lists estimated male lists estimated ratio lists estimated ratio lists . . . . . . . . . . . . unodc dnr research brief cover.pdf unodc dnr research brief.pdf 