 e rapportage nrm eng child pornography child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur dit is een uitgave van ministerie van veiligheid en justitie postbus eh den haag www.rijksoverheid.nl venj maand publicatienr j postal address p.o. box eh the hague the netherlands t www.bnrm.nl may publicatienr j national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur child pornography first report of the d utch n ational rapporteur publication details reference national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bnrm bureau of the dutch national rapporteur p.o. box eh the hague www.bnrm.nl lay out het vlakke land rotterdam bnrm http www.bnrm.nl http www.hetvlakkeland.nl http www.bnrm.nl table of contents table of contents overview of figures and tables abbreviations used foreword introduction current context scope covered by the reporting role perpetrators victims and technology creating the reporting body structure of the report the phenomenon of child pornography . introduction . developments over time . . introduction . . the period up to the mid s . . mid s to present . legal framework article b of the dutch criminal code . the nature of child pornography . . technology . . . the nature of the material . . . the activities production distribution and possession . . . functions of child abuse material for perpetrators . . perpetrators . . victims . the extent of child abuse material . . the number of perpetrators safety in numbers . . the number of victims . . the volume of child abuse material . conclusion the government agenda . introduction . policy developments since the early s . the significance of the lanzarote convention child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . security and justice . . security and justice the digital dimension . . domestic violence . health welfare and sport . . sexual health . . regional plan to tackle child abuse . education culture and science . social affairs and employment . economic affairs agriculture and innovation . conclusion implementation . introduction . prevention . . introduction . . prevention measures aimed at perpetrators . . prevention measures aimed at victims . . situational prevention . . public prevention measures . . conclusion . identification recording . . the identification of perpetrators . . . stop it now uk ireland . . . stichting m. report crime anonymously . . the identification of victims . . . the kindertelefoon service . . . helpwanted.nl . . . child abuse counselling and reporting centre . . the identification of content . . . the hotline combating child pornography on the internet . . . the cyber crime reporting website . . conclusion . detection . . introduction . . working method in detection . . complications . . the new structure . . conclusion . prosecution and trial . . prosecution . . trial . . sentences and orders . . prosecution and trial in figures . . . prosecution in figures . . . cases concluded in first instance in figures . . . cases settled on appeal in figures table of contents . . . characteristics of suspects and persons convicted . . trends . . conclusion . after care for and supervision of sex offenders . . introduction . . legal framework . . integrated approach after care for and supervision of offenders . . . starting points . . . phases in the integrated approach . . youth offenders . . probation and after care quantitative data . . conclusion . victim assistance . . introduction . . provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse . . provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse within the context of child pornography . . provision of assistance to victims of the distribution possession and viewing of child abuse material . . the amsterdam sexual abuse case . . conclusion . public private sector partnerships in the netherlands in the matter of child pornography . . introduction . . interplay of forces in public private sector partnerships . . concrete actions of public private sector partnerships . . . private sector . . . intermediate level social organisations . . direction of public private sector partnerships in the netherlands . . conclusion conclusions and recommendations . core message . where do matters stand at present . . child pornography as a complex phenomenon . . the government agenda . . implementation . . . general . . . prevention . . . identification and registration . . . detection . . . prosecution and trial . . . after care and supervision . . . victim assistance . . . public private sector partnerships . connections . specification and recommendations child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur bibliography appendix a copine scale a justification of research methods used the amk study the public prosecution service data and investigation research and policy database for judicial documentation study the probation study a explanatory notes to tables figures and statistics explanatory notes to tables explanatory notes to figures explanatory notes to statistics a supplementary tables supplement to . . . the hotline combating child pornography on the internet a supplement to . . . prosecutions in figures b supplement to . . . cases concluded in first instance in figures c supplement to . . . cases settled on appeal in figures d supplement to . . . characteristics of suspects and persons convicted supplement to . . probation and after care quantitative data overview of figures and tables figure . perpetrators victims and technology figure . moran s pyramid model figure . annual number of reports to the hotline combating child pornography on the internet including content reported in duplicate figure . annual reports including content reported in duplicate according to place where found figure . proportion of unique reports relating to child abuse material compared with the total number of unique reports figure . proportion of unique reports of child abuse material on servers hosted in the netherlands compared with the total number of unique reports of child abuse material figure . gender distribution amongst victims depicted in the incidences of child abuse material on servers in the netherlands that were reported in figure . age distribution amongst victims depicted in the incidences of child abuse material on servers in the netherlands that were reported in figure . number of cases registered with the public prosecution service figure . cases registered in each district court public prosecutor s office total figure . nature of the registered cases figure . registered cases by gravest offences figure . registered cases and preventive detention figure . number of cases concluded by the public prosecution service figure . concluded cases by type of settlement figure . number of cases concluded in first instance figure . cases settled in first instance by type of settlement figure . convictions in first instance by severity of charges figure . convictions in first instance according to sentence imposed figure . non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences handed down in the first instance according to term category figure . community service orders handed down in first instance according to term category figure . cases settled in first instance in which an appeal was lodged figure . number of cases settled on appeal figure . cases settled on appeal according to settlement type total figure . convictions on appeal according to sentence imposed total child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur figure . non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences handed down on appeal according to term category total figure . community service orders handed down on appeal according to term category figure . age of suspects figure . age of persons convicted figure . intervention model figure . connections model table . child pornography online offline and hands on hands off table . sexual violence against children online offline and hands on hands off table . experience of sexual abuse by gender table . online sexual experiences by gender table . number of individuals who contacted the stop it now helpline june to november inclusive table . number of reports of child pornography to report crime anonymously table . reports of abuse and violence and online abuse table . reports of sexual abuse to the kindertelefoon service by gender and age table . number of reports to helpwanted.nl table . number of reports of child pornography to meldpunt cybercrime table . number of unique clients with offenses related to child pornography grouped according to the various reasons for registering with probation and after care services in table . gender of clients with offenses related to child pornography table . age of clients with offenses related to child pornography during intake table . selection of the risc scores of clients with offenses related to child pornography in abbreviations used abrvs afdeling bestuursrechtspraak van de raad van state administrative jurisdiction department of the council of state ace adverse childhood experiences afp algemeen forensische psychiatrie general forensic psychiatry ag advocaat generaal advocate general amc academisch medisch centrum academic medical centre university of amsterdam amk advies en meldpunt kindermishandeling child abuse counselling and reporting centre ams ix amsterdam internet exchange ao algemeen overleg general consultation apv algemeen plaatselijke verordening general municipal bye law asacp association of sites advocating child protection ashg advies en steunpunt huiselijk geweld advice and support centre for domestic violence awf analytical work file b w burgemeester en wethouders mayor and aldermen bbs bulletin board system bij bestuurlijke informatie justitiabelen administrative ex prisoner information service for municipalities bivgeg bestuurlijke informatievoorziening gemeenten ex gedetineerden provision of administrative information to municipalities regarding ex prisoners bjg besluit justiti le gegevens decree concerning personal details disclosed in legal proceedings bjz bureau jeugdzorg youth care agency bnrm bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings bob bijzondere opsporingsbevoegdheden special investigative powers child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur br non bovenregionale recherche noord en oost nederland north and east netherlands supraregional crime squad brt bovenregionaal rechercheteam supraregional crime squad bzk binnenlandse zaken en koninkrijkrelaties ministry of the interior and kingdom relations cac children s advocacy centre cba criminaliteitsbeeldanlyse crime picture analysis cbp college bescherming persoonsgegevens dutch data protection authority ccv centrum voor criminaliteitspreventie en veiligheid dutch centre for crime prevention and safety ceop child exploitation online protection centre chi child helpline international cjg centrum voor jeugd en gezin youth and family centre cmo centrum voor maatschappelijke ontwikkeling institute for social support and welfare copine combating paedophile information networks in europe cosa cirkels voor ondersteuning samenwerking en aanspreekbaarheid circles of support and accountability covog centraal orgaan verklaring omtrent het gedrag central agency for certificates of good conduct cpe child pornography exploitation cri centrale recherche informatiedienst national criminal intelligence service csom centre for sex offender management cwi centrum voor werk en inkomen centre for work and income dci defence for children international dienst ipol dienst internationale politie informatie department of international police information dinpol dienst internationale politie samenwerking department of international police cooperation dns domain name system dsrt dienst specialistische recherche toepassingen special criminal investigations applications department dvi diploma veilig internet certificate in safe internet use ecpat end child prostitution child pornography and the trafficking of children for sexual purposes efc european financial coalition against commercial sexual exploitation against children online el i economische zaken landbouw en innovatie ministry of economic affairs agriculture and innovation abbreviations used eu european union evrm europees verdrag tot bescherming van de rechten van de mens en de fundamentele vrijheden echr european convention on human rights ez economische zaken ministry of economic affairs fpt forensisch psychiatrisch toezicht forensic psychiatric supervision ftp file transfer protocol ggd gemeentelijke gezondheidsdienst municipal health service ggz geestelijke gezondheidszorg en verslavingszorg netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care ghor geneeskundige hulpverleningsorganisaties in de regio regional medical care organisations gmw gemeentewet municipalities act gps ge ntegreerd processysteem strafrecht integrated process system gsma gsm association gvak gemeenschappelijke voorziening aanpak kinderporno joint provisions to tackle child pornography hdief herkenning digitale informatie en fingerprinting identification of digital information and fingerprinting hr hoge raad supreme court icaid interpol child abuse image database icann internet corporation for assigned names and numbers ismec international centre for missing exploited children icse db international child sexual exploitation database ict information and communication technology iiav internationaal informatiecentrum en archief voor de vrouwenbeweging institute for women s history ilo international labour organisation indigo initiatief niets doen is geen optie doing nothing is not an option initiative ip internet protocol irc internet relay chat isp internet service provider iwf internet watch foundation iyac international youth advisory congress j g jeugd en gezin programme ministry for youth and family jds justitieel documentatiesysteem criminal records system jgz jeugdgezondheidszorg youth healthcare child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur jip jongeren informatie punt young people s information point joss juridische opvang slachtoffers seksueel geweld legal support for victims of sexual violence justid justiti le informatiedienst legal information service kids onderkenning en aanpak van kinderpornokoeriers en kindersekstoerisme door multidisciplinaire samenwerking op schiphol identification and tackling of child pornography couriers and child sex tourism by means of multi disciplinary cooperation at schiphol klpd korps landelijke politiediensten national police services agency kmar koninklijke marechaussee royal military constabulary knmg koninklijke nederlandsche maatschappij tot bevordering der geneeskunst royal dutch medical association lp landelijk parket national public prosecutor s office ljn landelijk juriprudentie nummer national case law number lovs landelijk overleg voorzitters strafsectoren national consultative committee for the chairmen of criminal law sectors lvct landelijk centrum voor vroegkinderlijke chronische traumatisering national centre for chronic traumatisation in early childhood macsac mobile alliance against child sexual abuse content mappa multiple agency public protection arrangements mappp multiple agency public protection panels msn microsoft network messenger mvt memorie van toelichting explanatory memorandum naps nationaal actieplan aanpak seksueel misbruik van kinderen national action plan for combating sexual abuse of children ncmec national centre for missing and exploited children ncss national cyber security strategy nctv nationaal coordinator terrorismebestrijding en veiligheid national coordinator for counterterrorism and security ndb nationaal dreigingsbeeld national threat assessment ndic national drug intelligence centre nfi nederlands forensisch instituut netherlands forensic institute ngo non governmental organisation nhl noordelijke hogeschool leeuwarden nhl university of applied sciences leeuwarden nicc nationale infrastructuur ter bestrijding van cybercrime national infrastructure for tackling cybercrime abbreviations used nip nederlands instituut van psychologen netherlands institute of psychologists nj nederlandse jurisprudentie dutch law reports nji nederlands jeugdinstituut netherlands youth institute noc nsf nederlands olympisch comit nederlandse sport federatie netherlands olympic committee dutch sports federation nr nationale recherche national crime squad nri nationaal registratie instituut national registration institute nrm nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nspcc national society for the prevention of cruelty to children ntd notice and takedown nvvr nederlandse vereniging voor rechtspraak netherlands association for the judiciary objd onderzoeks en beleidsdatabase justiti le documentatie investigation and policy database of judicial documentation ocw onderwijs cultuur en wetenschap ministry of education culture and science om openbare ministerie public prosecution service ovj officier van justitie public prosecutor p p peer to peer pag parket generaal national office of the public prosecution service pbeg publicatieblad van de europese gemeenschappen official journal of the european communities pbeu publicatieblad van de europese unie official journal of the european union pg procureur generaal procurator general pij plaatsing in een inrichting voor jeugdigen placement in a young offenders institution pps publiekprivate samenwerking public private sector partnership ptsd post traumatic stress disorder pvakp programma verbeteren aanpak kinderporno programme of improvements in tackling child pornography yiss young internet safety surveys raak reflectie en actiegroep aanpak kindermishandeling reflection and action group to tackle child abuse rak raak regionale aanpak kindermishandeling regional action plan against child abuse child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur rb. rechtbank court rc rechter commissaris examining judge rhc raad van hoofdcommissarissen board of chief commissioners riagg regionaal instituut voor ambulante geestelijke gezondheidszorg regional institute for outpatient mental healthcare risc recidive inschattings schalen risk assessment scales rkc raad van korpchefs board of chief officers rn reclassering nederland netherlands probation and after care services sho samenwerkende hulporganisaties dutch interchurch aid siba statistische informatievoorziening en beleidsanalyse department for statistical information and policy analysis sns social network sites sr wetboek van strafrecht dutch criminal code srgz monitor seksuele en reproductieve gezondheid zorgbehoefte en zorggebruik monitor of sexual and reproductive health care requirements and use of care provision stb. staatsblad dutch bulletin of acts and decrees stcrt. staatscourant dutch government gazette stichting m. stichting meld misdaad anoniem report crime anonymously stsgg samenwerkingsverband tegen seksueel geweld groningen groningen cooperative partnership against sexual violence sv wetboek van strafvordering dutch code of criminal procedure szw sociale zaken en werkgelegenheid ministry of social affairs and employment tbi team beeld en internet images and internet team tbs terbeschikkingstelling placement under a hospital order tcp transmission control protocols tgp thumbnail gallery post tgp cj thumbnail gallery post circle jerk thtc team high tech crime tijn samenwerkingsverband twente ijsselland noord oost gelderland twente ijsselland noord oost gelderland cooperative partnership abbreviations used trb. tractatenblad treaty series uk united kingdom un united nations unicef united nations children s fund usa united states of america uwv uitvoeringinstituut werknemersverzekeringen employee insurance agency venj veiligheid en justitie ministry of security and justice vgt virtual global taskforce vi voorwaardelijke invrijheidstelling release on licence vir verwijsindex risicojongeren reference index of young people at risk vng vereniging van nederlandse gemeenten association of netherlands municipalities vog verklaring omtrent het gedrag certificate of good conduct vws volksgezondheid welzijn en sport ministry of public health welfare and sport who world health organisation wjz wet op de jeugdzorg youth care act wodc wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documentatiecentrum research and documentation centre www world wide web zao zeden aanspreek officier liaison officer for victims of sexual abuse zm zittende magistratuur the judiciary foreword the report before you is my first report on child pornography or in other words child abuse material. it forms the outcome of my research into the nature and extent of child pornography and into the measures taken by the dutch government to tackle it. the core message of my report is that children are entitled to protection from all forms of sexual violence. child pornography in other words the capturing of sexual violence in images or on film is just one type of sexual violence. in almost every case of child pornography sexual abuse is at the basis of its production. in order to adequately protect the sexual safety of children an integrated approach is required. in the netherlands an artificial distinc tion seems to have existed until recently between the measures deployed to tackle child pornography on the one hand and those used to combat violations of the sexual integrity of children on the other. that distinction has stood in the way of a broad integrated approach towards tackling sexual violence against children. the dutch government seems to have taken my message on board. through the years children have been sexually abused and the response to this has varied over time. in the past children were often not believed sometimes simply because they were children and at other times because adults did not want to or were not able to believe such a thing. preserving the good repu tation of institutions was sometimes regarded as more important than protecting the individual child. even today signs of sexual abuse often remain unnoticed. in the netherlands a great deal of attention is currently being devoted to the sexual abuse of children partly as a result of the inquiries regarding sexual abuse within the roman catholic church child welfare services and day care centres. a number of high profile cases of sexual abuse have emerged over the past decades resulting in retrospective in vestigations into how such a thing could happen. however by that stage it is already too late. protecting children from sexual violence needs to be a constant concern for the government and not something that is triggered by the occurrence of present day incidents. the fact that images of the sexual abuse exist and that those images are distributed by means of modern technology does not mean that child pornography is essentially different from other types of sexual violence. however if images of the abuse exist it is no longer a question of believing or not believing. after all the images provide proof that abuse has taken place and that is precisely the aspect where the integration of measures to tackle child pornography into the overall approach towards tackling sexual violence against children can play an important role. for the victim the existence of images adds yet another dimension to the abuse. once the images are on the internet they cannot actually be removed. this means that attaining closure with regard to a traumatic experience cannot be achieved. after all the material will still exist on the internet when the victims are adults. it is therefore neces sary for the authorities providing assistance to take account of this permanency in the assistance they provide. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur an integrated approach puts the child first the task of combating child pornography should not exist in isolation but should be part of a broad consistent programme of measures aimed at combating sexual violence against children. what exactly does that entail an integrated approach not only focuses upon detecting perpetrators but above all it puts the child first. in view of the exponential growth of abusive material on the internet repressive measures alone are not capable of providing sufficient protection for children. if the approach is to be effective it must also include measures aimed at the prevention and identification of victims and perpe trators alike as preventing someone from becoming a perpetrator once again also means preventing children from being further abused. within this approach attention must be devoted to the internet and other forms of technology as a matter of course. this means for example that in cases of sexual abuse checks should be carried out to ascertain whether images of the abuse were also produced. this does not currently take place as a mat ter of course. in addition the identification of victims is something that not only needs to take place in the real world but it should also be a case of listening to what children are saying online. the assistance that is provided to victims needs to be tailored to the world in which we currently live and an answer needs to be found that addresses the possible digital aspects involved in being a victim. it is clear that an integrated approach requires the involvement of many parties each with expertise in its own field. effective coordination is therefore also required. recent developments in october i presented my findings and recommendations to the minister of security and justice and the state secretary for health welfare and sport after which the report was discussed in parliament. partly as a result of my findings various positive developments have since been set in motion as matters of priority. it is my pleasure to single out the most important of these developments here. by far the most important measure is the taking up of my recommendation to develop an integrated pro gramme of measures to tackle child pornography. the ministry of security and justice and the ministry of health welfare and sport are assuming joint responsibility for this. by doing so they are demonstrating their commitment to the obligations arising from the convention on the rights of the child and its optional protocol and the lanzarote convention. a child abuse and sexual abuse task force which is yet to be established will coordinate the implementation of the policy. the most significant changes have taken place with respect to the understanding of this issue among those responsible for providing assistance to victims with the increasing realisation that cyberspace is a relatively new arena in which sexual abuse is taking place and one that adds a new dimension to victimhood. moreover the understanding that the internet presents an opportunity to combat sexual violence is also growing. in february an online reporting button was launched where children can find help and advice in the event of negative experiences on the internet. efforts have not only been made in terms of identifying potential victims but also in terms of identifying potential perpetrators. in this way the offender oriented stop it now programme which was launched in april will help prevent children from being subjected to sexual violence. as far as detecting perpetrators is concerned the capacity that has been deployed to combat child por nography has increased substantially. the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography that had already been set in motion has enabled a more effectively integrated working method to be foreword developed within a short space of time. a new large scale and national child pornography unit will not only work in collaboration with the national high tech crime unit but also with regional police units which attend to types of analogue sexual violence against children. detection will be aimed at rescuing victims and locating perpetrators who produce material. the results of a project to employ non judicial interventions for low risk offenders those who view child pornography sporadically have been posi tive. this project will therefore also be implemented on a national scale. when prosecuting suspects the ability to ensure that victims remain anonymous in criminal proceed ings is a positive development as is the extension of the right to speak to include parents in cases in which very young children are not able to speak for themselves. developments are also underway right at the very end of the judicial process which involves the reintegration of convicted perpetrators including the expansion of cosa a probation and after care project and the investigation of the pos sibilities of long term or life long supervision of convicted sex offenders. international cooperation sexual violence against children is not limited to one particular period in time. but that is not the only thing sexual violence against children is a phenomenon that exists in every single country and that evokes similar emotions elsewhere as it does in the netherlands. the task of tackling child pornogra phy is far from simple. when conducting my research i looked into the ways in which other countries combat child pornography and other forms of sexual violence against children. sexual violence against children does not stop at the border. after all with one click images of a dutch child being abused can be downloaded by an individual in australia. images of foreign victims can also be found on the comput ers of dutch suspects. child sex tourism in itself also has an international component. the significant international nature of the problem calls for cross border cooperation. it has already been demonstrated that international cooperation enables networks of producers and distributors of child abuse material to be rounded up and facilitates the identification and rescue of children who have become victims. this is my first report on child pornography but also my last. and that is a good sign. the dutch govern ment has extended my monitoring role in relation to child pornography to the entire field of sexual violence against children. this means that there is government recognition of the fact that child por nography is but one of the forms of sexual violence against children and that it needs to be tackled as such. my next report will therefore encompass that entire field and consequently the progress achieved in tackling child pornography will form an integral part of that report. words of thanks as far as bnrm is concerned the realm of child pornography and the approach towards tackling it was something new. all individuals and organisations involved in tackling child pornography have made their services available to my bureau and i in order to provide an insight into the implementation pro cesses in this complex area. the network we have built and the contacts we have made have all con tributed significantly towards the insights that we gained. all of the parties involved from advies en meldpunten kindermishandeling child abuse counselling and reporting centres to team beeld en internet images and internet team were willing to share information and viewpoints with us and we wish to express our gratitude for that. statistics play an essential part when it comes to determining trends this formed an additional area in which bnrm needed to tap into both old and new sources in order to show the desired results. we would child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur therefore like to thank child helpline international meldpunt cybercrime cyber crime reporting website meldpunt kinderporno op internet hotline combating child pornography on the internet the netherlands probation and after care services stichting m. report crime anonymously stop it now uk ireland and the wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documentatiecentrum research and documentation centre . many interns have provided a boost to the activities of bnrm. they carried out subsidiary research and information retrieval work in short they have made a relevant contribution towards the realisation of this report and i am also very grateful to them. the new mandate was a challenge for me and my bureau. the efforts and dedication of my staff have made this report into the report now in front of you. i am very grateful to my staff for all their work in helping to complete this task. c.e. dettmeijer vermeulen national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings introduction growing children deserve every protection possible from all of us. it is imperative that children grow up in a safe environment and are able to develop into adults in a healthy and balanced way. people who are victims of sexual violence or abuse during childhood often carry the scars of those traumatic events with them for the rest of their lives. based upon their own responsibility family society and the government must therefore make every effort to ensure that children are protected from any harm to their physical and mental integrity . current context child pornography forms the subject of a great deal of attention from both the social and political spheres. it is after all closely related to sexual violence against and the sexual abuse of children both of which provoke extreme repugnance and indignation within society. the opportunities to produce distribute and view child pornography have increased exponentially due to the rise of the internet and the rapid rate of development in digital technology. in the netherlands this topic has gained even greater prominence as a result of a number of notorious cases. such examples include the case of benno l. who produced images of acts of sexual abuse that he carried out involving children entrusted to him in his capacity as a swimming instructor the boylover case involving an internet forum for users with a preferential interest in children and in which a dutch citizen managed the server and in part the website and the most recent and utterly shocking amsterdam sexual abuse case in which the sexual abuse of children took place on a large scale of which images were also pro approval of the council of europe convention on the protection of children against sexual exploita tion and sexual abuse drawn up on october treaty series explanatory memoran dum parliamentary papers ii r no. p. sexual violence is defined in the zedenalmanak almanac of sexual offences published by the dutch ministry of justice as follows all occurrences in which individuals are confronted with sexual acts or behaviour of a sexual nature of third parties against their will whether within their own home or elsewhere and in which violence is involved in an unequal balance of power . sexual abuse applies to situations in which sex acts take place that involve the abuse of a dependency relationship . de savornin lohman et al. pp. . no child pornography was available on this website however links were provided to child pornography sites. also known as the robert m. case after the chief suspect. this case will be referred to as the amster dam sexual abuse case further in this report. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur duced and distributed. the large number of pending cases of child pornography being dealt with by the police has also ensured the attention of politicians. the interim report from the deetman committee of february and the fourth public notice from the samson committee confirm that the sexual abuse of children is a perennial problem. the recent sexual abuse cases reinforce this picture. the visibility of sexual violence against children and therefore the social and political attention that this phenomenon attracts are also increasing. sexual violence against children also forms an important item on various policy agendas on the inter national level. concerns at un level with regard to the sexual safety of children formed an important reason for the creation of new regulations. in the council of europe reached an agreement on a convention to protect children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention . the aim of this convention is to protect children in a broad sense from sexual violence including child pornography in which aspects of the digital domain such as the increased use of the internet by both perpetrators and victims play an important role. this is the first convention in which technological de velopments were expressly taken into account in regulations against the background of general protec tion of children from sexual violence. the convention therefore forms a significant starting point with regard to the protection of children from sexual violence and in turn also in the strategy to tackle child pornography. work is currently underway in an eu context to draw up a new directive to tackle sexual abuse sexual exploitation of children and child pornography. in recent times the ministry of security and justice formerly ministry of justice has taken a number of initiatives specifically designed to tackle child pornography including the creation of a task force aanpak kinderporno en kindersekstoerisme and the creation of the programma verbeteren aanpak kinderporno pvakp programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . in addition the decision was taken to double the police capacity earmarked for tackling child pornography. in october a spe in germany an independent committee has also conducted a study of sexual abuse of children un abh ngigen beauftragten zur aufarbeitung des sexuellen kindermissbrauchs independent commissioner for the rehabilitation of victims of child sexual abuse . this involved a wide ranging investigation in which sexual abuse in churches official bodies and families was examined and the emphasis was placed upon coping with the abuse. amongst other aspects it emerged from the final report that child pornography as a form of sexual violence against children is one of the phenomena of which further and more detailed investigation is deemed necessary. investigation committees concerning sexual abuse are partly the result of the increased visibility but they also contribute towards achieving this visibility. optional protocol on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography to the convention on the rights of the child new york may treaty series and . see . for further details. convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series . see also . for further details. see also . . decision of the minister for justice of november no. concerning the creation of the task force aanpak kinderporno en kindersekstoerisme task force on child pornography and child sex tourism . see . . . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . introduction cial task entailing the production of reports concerning child pornography was introduced that role of rapporteur on this issue was incorporated into the role of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm . scope covered by the reporting role starting in october an orientation study in this new field was undertaken that produced an impression of the phenomenon of child pornography within the context of sexual violence against children. this will be examined in detail in the first chapter this introduction will only outline the scope of the content of this reporting role. the subject of the task of producing reports is child pornography which essentially involves images of sex acts by and involving minors. in short the provisions of the dutch criminal code in relation to child pornography mean that the production distribution pos session and viewing of child abuse images constitute criminal offences. victimisation in child por nography may therefore in the first instance relate to the fact that children form the victims during the production of such material. in many cases the children involved are also the victims of sexual abuse. such cases involve sexual violence committed against children which then becomes child pornography due to the fact that images are or have been made of that abuse. furthermore children may either im mediately or later in life become the victims of the distribution possession or viewing of child pornog raphy in which they themselves appear. the aspects that cause the children to remain victims relate to the fact that the child goes on to experience the implications of appearing as the subject of child abuse images. this particular aspect of victimization has shown explosive growth with the rise of the internet. victims perpetrators and technology form the core of the phenomenon of child pornography in which the technological aspect relates to the abusive material involving children itself on the one hand and the technological means of production distribution and possession on the other. these vary significant ly. there are many types of perpetrators victims images and means of producing distributing and or possessing digital child abuse images. although the material itself that is currently available is primarily in digital form the capacity of being a perpetrator and the state of victimisation exist both in the offline and online domains and as a result the phenomenon consists of an analogue and a digital element. decree of october of the minister for justice comprising the arrangements to establish the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings dutch government gazette no. . a literature study analysis of policy initiatives and building up an extensive network within working practice formed part of this bnrm also organised an expert meeting at the beginning of see also the overview of activities at www.bnrm.nl. see establishment decree instellingsbesluit . nevertheless the establishment decree places the emphasis upon the nrm being able to undertake activities in this area of investigation as it sees fit. article b of the dutch criminal code see . . the samson committee which investigates sexual abuse of children who have been placed in insti tutions under the government s responsibility or with foster parents describes the context of per petrators victims and the situation. with regard to child pornography the digital environment and therefore the technological aspect constitute that context. for the sake of ease of reading the terms virtual and digital world and cyberspace are used to refer to the online domain whilst the terms analogue real and physical world are used for the offline domain. an explanation of the terms follows in . . . http www.bnrm.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur focus the protection of children from sexual violence the aforementioned core elements of the phenomenon make it clear that child pornography is inextri cably linked to other forms of sexual violence and that it cannot be tackled neither can that strategy be monitored if the focus solely rests on the child abuse material and does not extend to the underlying sexual violence. this also means that the reporting role must be performed in such a way that the phe nomenon of child pornography is regarded as one aspect of the broad area of sexual violence against children both offline and online. if the reporting task is limited to child abuse material as such the purpose it would serve would be too limited. there is a broad consensus with regard to the great importance of protecting children from sexual vio lence and with regard to the harm that sexual violence causes to the child s development and wellbe ing. child pornography has been made a punishable offence in order to provide a means of tackling the sexual abuse of children. the criminalisation is in keeping with the obligation imposed upon countries in the form of various conventions and tools in order to protect children from all forms of sexual exploitation and abuse including the use of children in pornographic material. for this reason tackling child pornography partly serves to protect children from sexual violence both in the form of actual abuse and in the form of exposure to the implications of the production distribution and pos session of such images. the production acquisition and viewing of child abuse material via internet are deemed to constitute online sexual violence whilst the actual abuse constitutes a form of offline sexual violence against children. perspective from the viewing of child abuse material to protection policy in this report we will examine the policy used by the government and other organisations to protect chil dren from sexual violence in a broader context from the perspective of child pornography. as such this report will not allow us to fully map out this policy of protection nor can we examine the even broader topic relating to the combating of child abuse in general. however this report can indicate the extent to which aspects associated with child pornography are taken into account in the protection policy and its implementation in practice. in short the findings boil down to the fact that policy initiatives that aim to tackle sexual violence in the analogue real world do not take account of specific online aspects such as child abuse images and that the same applies vice versa. with regard to the practical implementation of the policy we not only examined specific interventions in relation to child pornography since these chiefly concern repressive measures based upon detection and monitoring pursuant to article b of the dutch criminal code and would not take account of the principles expressed in the lanzarote convention performing this task in a way that covers the full extent of sexual violence would reach too far beyond the task in hand at present and the means that are currently available. smallbone et al. see . . for example see article sub section c of the un convention on the rights of the child states par ties undertake to protect the child from all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. for these purposes states parties shall in particular take all appropriate national bilateral and multilateral measures to prevent the exploitative use of children in pornographic performances and materi als see . with regard to the lanzarote convention and other international documents. see table . and table . for an explanation of the forms of offline and online sexual violence against children. introduction but also the extent to which any abusive context is taken into account in other forms of intervention relat ing to sexual violence against children such as prevention identification and registration and care provi sion for victims. with regard to certain elements it is not possible to make an explicit distinction in rela tion to child pornography within the broad context of sexual violence against children as we do not have that reference framework. we also assessed the extent to which policy and implementation incorporate the complexity and in particular the variation within the phenomenon in initiatives and actual actions. perpetrators victims and technology the figure below shows how the three aspects of child pornography perpetrators victims and technol ogy relate to one another. it also shows the relationship with other forms of sexual violence against children. figure . perpetrators victims and technology tra cking in human beings sexual o ences sexual abuse child abuse potential victims potential perpetrators production of child abuse material child abuse sexual abuse possession and distribution of child abuse material technology child abuse material and means of production distribution and possession the capacity of being a perpetrator victimisation and technology converge in the dark blue area in the form of the production of child abuse material. the light blue areas indicate the routes by which such activity is identified and addressed. a few illustrative examples are as follows where perpetrators and technology overlap one another the police may suspect individuals of possessing or distributing mate rial but potential victims are not yet known. it may be the case however that an individual is not only viewing the material but is also found to be producing it. if that is the case we find ourselves back in the dark blue area. when victims and technology material overlap one another the question as far as bodies that are responsible for the child s care such as amk youth care agency or community care services are concerned is whether they are also taking account of indications of victimisation from technology in this case consists of child abuse material on the one hand and information and com munication technology ict on the other hand which is used in the production distribution and for possession of such material see . . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the digital domain light blue area if victimisation by sexual abuse is suspected and are therefore able to contribute towards locating evidence of the abuse and putting an end to a situation in which the abuse is taking place offline. similarly by working in cooperation with the police they then would also be able to help to identify producers of child abuse material dark blue area . where perpetrators and victims appear in the same field in the figure this indicates cases in which there may be evidence of an offence such as trafficking in persons child prostitution sexual abuse or general abuse. by reporting such cases to the police or notifying the amk for example victims and perpetrators can be identified. the question in this regard is whether the bodies concerned also consider the eventuality that abusive material has been or is being produced. what also becomes clear is that the route from a light blue area to the dark blue area actual production can give rise to information concerning another light blue area. it may be the case for example that when examining a suspect s computer hard drive in an initially relatively simple case of possession this individual is also found to be a producer or be connected with a producer. upon closer investigation this conclusion may give rise to the discovery of other physical abuse overlap between perpetrators and victims or the identification of victims on material that has already been found overlap between victims and technology material . the sections of the circles that do not overlap with another circle represent a situation in which no actual perpetrator or victim or recently produced material is found but which concerns old material and the potential capacity of being a perpetrator or a potential victim which includes the potential for recidivism of perpetrators and re victimisation of victims. the question will then be which bodies must take action in this regard and what form the intervention will take. figure . represents the focus and the perspective of the reporting task in relation to child abuse mate rial. the core focus is the protection of children from sexual violence. the employment of a child por nography perspective may prove functional for the provision of that protection. at the end of this report the findings will be linked back more closely to this figure. then we can ascertain which interventions could together form an integrated strategy in tackling child pornography. creating the reporting body in the decree establishing the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm was revised. by virtue of the new arrangements the nrm reported not only on the strategy to tackle traf ficking in human beings but also that of tackling child pornography. the explanatory notes to the estab lishment decree noted the following with regard to the assignment of the reporting task to the nrm a relationship between the investigative area of human trafficking and sexual exploitation partly ensues from the lanzarote convention. this convention has in part been grafted onto existing international agreements on trafficking in human beings. the common nature of child pornography and trafficking in human beings as transnational offences also emerges from these documents. the decree to establish a rapporteur kinderpornografie was no sudden action. the member of dutch parliament kees van der staaij sgp noted in child pornography child sex tourism traffick ing of children and child prostitution should be viewed in conjunction in the form of a preventative order of october of the minister for justice concerning the regulations to establish a dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings. introduction and repressive approach. is a rapporteur that monitors and coordinates the matter a good idea the verbeterprogramma kinderporno op beeld vastgelegd sexueel misbruik van kinderen programme of improvements in tackling child pornography the sexual abuse of children recorded in photo graphic form of the national police services agency was published in . this programme also made recommendations with regard to monitoring and one of those recommendations read as follows investigate whether the tackling of child pornography as a subject can be added to the duties of the nrm or whether a separate national rapporteur in sexual abuse of minors could be appointed. the organisations meldpunt kinderporno op internet hotline combating child pornography on the internet and ecpat nederland end child prostitution child pornography and the trafficking of children for sexual purposes wrote a letter to the chamber arguing for a gen eral consultation in with regard to the appointment of a national rapporteur in the sexual exploitation of children in order to be able to measure the effects of policy and the way in which it was being implemented in operational form. the member of dutch parliament fred teeven vvd stated the following in relation to this subject in the appointment of a national rapporteur for legislation pertaining to sexual offences and child pornography is a good idea. in the establishment decree of october the duties of the rapporteur with regard to child pornog raphy were specified on an equal footing with its duties relating to trafficking in humans. the brief consists of investigating the developments in the extent and characteristics of child pornography and the effects of the policy measures that are taken to tackle it advising the government with regard to the prevention and tackling of child pornography and producing periodic reports for the government. except for the netherlands no other countries have yet established an independent reporting body concerning child pornography. however there are officials operating with a similar mandate in connec tion with the united nations such as the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography and the special representative on violence against children. the mandate of the special rapporteur has already demonstrated the existence of a certain connection between the respective reporting tasks concerning child pornography and human trafficking in so far as these con cern child victims. the special rapporteur and the special representative recently published a joint parliamentary papers ii vi no. . landelijk project kinderporno national project to tackle child pornography . see www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl files biblio ao kinderporno december.pdf viewed september . this statement was made in the consultation between the parliamentary standing committee on jus tice and the minister for justice on october parliamentary papersii vi no. . establishment decree article . in the report she shows the findings of her investigation and the conclusions based upon these and she makes recommendations article paragraph . the recom mendations may be aimed at the central government local and other authorities the netherlands contribution to international organisations and non governmental organisations article para graph . they report to the human rights council of the united nations with regard to the exploitation of children all over the world and make recommendations concerning this area to governments other bodies of the united nations and non governmental organisations. special representative of the secretary general on violence against children. http www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl files biblio ao kinderporno december.pdf child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur report and the fact that they have sought to collaborate on such a report demonstrates the relationship and a certain overlap between the stated fields in which reports are produced and the issue of violence against children including sexual violence. some of these various areas of overlap will be discussed in this report and the common denominator is the protection of children from sexual violence. structure of the report the aim of this initial report is to provide some insight into the phenomenon of child pornography. the current state of affairs is also broadly analysed. the core theme within the analysis is that the approach towards tackling child pornography is inextricably linked to the overall approach towards tackling sexual violence against children and must form part of this. at the present time ample attention is already being paid to the structure of the policy on child pornography specifically with regard to the repressive strategy. considerations are being made regarding the most effective way of allocating the police capacity involved in the programme of measures at a central and regional level as described in the section on detection in chapter . however an effective programme consists of more than just repressive action alone. bodies other than the police and the judicial authorities have responsibilities in this area as well these other bodies will also be discussed in the following chapters. chapter the phenomenon of child pornography this chapter forms the response to an extensive literature study which enabled us to gain an insight into the complexity of the phenomenon. in this regard it is important to recognise that the subject concerned provokes a great many emotions in society which can easily give rise to the formation of an incomplete or inaccurate picture. it is precisely for this reason that for the sake of the efficacy of the policy it is necessary to take the information about the phenomenon that is currently available as a basis as much as possible. in any case that information shows that this issue concerns an ex traordinarily varied and multiform phenomenon. the legal context will be described and the nature of the phenomenon will be interpreted as a social phenomenon by investigating the various aspects in greater detail namely perpetrators victims and technology. based upon the various ways in which individuals can be perpetrators and victims combined with the developments in the technological domain we clarify the actual forms that child pornography can take. we will also devote attention to the question of the extent of the phenomenon a question that is important but that can hardly ever be answered. the number of perpetrators the number of victims and the quantity of the material can not be expressed in figures although it is clear that the phenomenon of child pornography is growing exponentially. furthermore we will provide an overview of the way in which the government s vision and social attitudes with regard to the phenomenon have evolved from the end of the s to the present day. the latter period of that timescale is characterised by the rapidly increasing importance of ict. this report will describe the influence that this has had upon the capacity of being a perpetrator and the potential of becoming victimized. the fact that is of key importance here is that the internet has become a pre eminently facilitating medium for child abuse material and that at the same time an important question is raised namely the extent to which ict actually provides new opportunities to protect children from sexual violence. joint report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornogra phy and the special representative of the secretary general on violence against children un doc a hrc march . introduction chapter the government agenda in this chapter we will analyse the manner in which the government has responded in terms of policy making to the phenomenon of child pornography as it manifested itself as a social phenomenon and is still continuing to do so. in view of the fact that child pornography forms part of the wider context of sexual violence against children this report will look at aspects including the question as to whether the specific characteristics of child pornography that are shown in chapter have been taken into account in the policy initiatives in that area over the past two decades. we will also examine current policy initiatives from the perspective of international developments and conventions in which articles and of the un conven tion on the rights of the child and the lanzarote convention in particular have served as the guideline. the discussion will highlight the most important policy initiatives that whether implicitly or explicitly directly or indirectly were geared towards tackling child pornography. in this regard we will not only examine the repressive strategy adopted by the police and the judicial authorities but also the policy initiatives formu lated or supported by the ministries of health welfare sport of education culture science of social affairs employment and of economic affairs agriculture innovation. in any case the analysis shows that initiatives that were directly geared towards tackling child pornography were taken by the ministry of security and justice and the initiatives concerning the other ministries were more specifically targeted towards tackling child abuse including sexual violence. child abuse material hardly ever constituted a fac tor in these initiatives and neither does there seem to be a clear insight into the digital element within the sexual abuse of children. it is therefore obvious that these initiatives need to be combined. chapter implementation the central question in this chapter relates to the way in which the means of implementation in practice contribute to the strategy to tackle child pornography within the wider context of protecting children from sexual violence. the processes that form part of the implementation policy that will be discussed include prevention identification and registration the repressive approach consisting of detection prosecution and trial and after care for and monitoring of convicted sex offenders and the provision of care to victims. in so far as they are available statistics relating to the implementation in practice have been collected and are presented in this chapter. the results of the orientation study that bnrm conducted amongst the amks are also shown in the section on notification and registration. finally this report also devotes special attention to the public private sector partnership which is es sential in tackling child pornography. the initiatives in this area that have already proved successful and the way in which the partnership could develop further are also described. a significant proportion of child pornography occurs on the internet and the internet forms a field of influence in which the private sector and the online community also play a role. by definition the distribution of child abuse material in digital format transcends borders and it is therefore essential that international cooperation is sought. a number of examples from other countries will also be described in this chapter and the relevance of those examples to practice in the netherlands will be explained. in practice it is not always the case that a specific implementation policy exists in order to tackle child pornography. with regard to the process of repression aspects relating to child pornography are the this is striking as the lanzarote convention in fact places all forms of sexual violence against children including child pornography on an equal footing when it comes to the basic principles to be used such as prevention and reporting see also . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur ones that have been examined in the greatest detail. this is not surprising however in view of the fact that article b of the dutch criminal code by definition forms the basic principle of action for the police the public prosecution service the judicial authorities and partly the probation service. nevertheless measures to monitor convicted sex offenders who are returning to society having served their sentence for example are not specifically targeted at those convicted of offences related to child pornography. this means that within the context of this report in order to gain an insight into imple mentation in practice the perspective must first of all be broadened to include the monitoring of those convicted of sexual offences against minors in general. then the perspective must be narrowed to focus upon persons convicted in cases involving child pornography. in this regard the question then for ex ample is the extent to which a digital context is taken into account in the monitoring of convicted sex offenders. this also applies to preventative measures and care provision for victims. likewise there is no specific implementation policy in these areas with regard to the question of how to deal with child pornography. chapter conclusions and recommendations finally the report states which conclusions can be drawn from the previous chapters and what recom mendations must be associated with these. in effect this report concerns one core message children are entitled to protection from all forms of sexual violence. the approach towards tackling child pornog raphy must form part of an integrated approach towards tackling sexual violence against children. connection coordination and monitoring form essential elements of that approach. the necessity to ensure connection and coordination is in keeping with the explanatory memoran dum to the act approving the aforementioned lanzarote convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. in this memorandum the government wholeheartedly subscribed to the purpose of the convention and stated how all elements from the strategy stated in the convention will be implemented in this country. the coordinating task arising from the lanzarote convention was assigned to the ministry of justice and the programme ministry for youth and family but has now been assigned to the ministry of security and justice and the ministry of public health welfare sport. as far as their practical implementation is concerned however these divided responsibilities for the broad domain of sexual abuse of children including child pornography hardly ever converge back together. the stated policy initiatives and provisions often exist separately from one another. the aforementioned situation provides reason to make the following recommendations to make provi sions for an integrated approach towards tackling sexual abuse which will fully encompass a programme of measures to tackle child pornography to ensure coordination to enable such a programme to be organised and implemented to set up an independent monitoring system and to embed all of this in law to ensure continuity. the foundation for this core message is laid in the following chapters and this core message will be made concrete in chapter . the aim of this report is to provide some pointers for the organisation of the integrated approach to protect children from sexual violence and to indicate the way in which a link can be found between the analogue and digital elements in this approach. parliamentary papers ii no. . the phenomenon of child pornography . introduction child pornography is a complex subject that evokes many emotions in society. however in order to be able to tackle it effectively it is necessary first of all to gain a good understanding of the phenomenon one that is based upon available knowledge as much as possible. in this chapter the phenomenon of child pornography will be introduced by referring to a number of developments in the netherlands the legal framework and relevant scientific insights. these will act as a guideline for the findings in the subsequent chapters regarding the government agenda and policy chapter the implementation of these chapter and the recommendations chapter . the chapter begins with a brief exploration of the history of child abuse material in the netherlands com prising three time periods . . the first period from the late s to the early s saw an increase in the production distribution and possession of child abuse material partly as a result of the liberal spirit of the age. at that time the phenomenon was quite literally visible in the netherlands. once attitudes towards child abuse images changed in the early s it became less visible. the large scale commercial circuit faded into the background although the amateur circuit continued to proliferate. advances in the realm of information and communication technology ict in the mid s helped to make the produc tion distribution and communication of abusive material more widely accessible. analogue child abuse material disappeared and digital material appeared. the rise of the internet brought it into the public eye once more and new issues emerged that presented a challenge in terms of policy and implementation. a historical overview will be followed by a description of the legal framework . and an account of the nature . and extent . of digital child abuse material. these sections will show that victims perpetrators and technology form the core of the phenomenon of child pornography whereby technol ogy concerns the abusive material involving children on the one hand and the technological means of production distribution and possession on the other. considerable variation exists with regard to these elements of child abuse material there are many types of perpetrators victims images and means of producing distributing and or possessing such material. although the material itself is primarily in digital format the roles of perpetrator and victim exist in both the offline and online domain as a result of which the phenomenon of child pornography for the sake of ease of reading the terms virtual and digital world and cyberspace are used to refer to the online domain whilst the terms analogue real and physical world are used for the offline domain. an explanation of the terms follows in . . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur incorporates both an analogue and a digital element. as an international cybercrime child por nography is not bound to time or space and this in itself imposes specific requirements as far as international cooperation is concerned. as an offence child pornography does not exist in isolation it always occurs and always has occurred in conjunction with other punishable sexual conduct ranging from child prostitution to trafficking in human beings from abuse to grooming or cor ruption. the influence of ict has not been limited to the nature and extent of child abuse material in fact it has also extended to include other sexual offences in which children can be victims. the common denominator of these offences is that children are victims of sexual violence. this context and the interconnection that exists are elements that must also be expressed in the form of policy and implementation. the report below illustrates this context and the potential relationship between different offences. parents offer their year old daughter for sex an year old girl was offered on the internet by her parents for sex in return for payment. the police and the judicial authorities intervened just before the child from hardinxveld giessendam was to fall prey to a year old man from brabant. the parents have already been in custody for four weeks . the year old man from heusden in brabant who had stated his intention to purchase the child was also arrested. the incident happened yesterday morning. child abuse material the girl s parents a year old man and his wife have already been in custody for four weeks. their arrest has been kept secret up to now due to the interests of the investigation. they are suspected of promoting sex with a minor trafficking in human beings and producing and distrib uting child abuse material. a spokeswoman for the public prosecution service om in rotterdam confirmed that the child was taken from her home immediately and placed with a foster family. the public prosecution service will make a public statement today. concerned family member the police received a tip off on may from a concerned member of the couple s family. he had discovered on the laptop he had borrowed from the couple some e mail correspondence between them and the year old suspect. the e mails contained negotiations as to how much money was to be paid in exchange for sex with the child. dozens of photographs had been exchanged includ ing photos of the year old child. grooming is the term given to making contact with children for sexual purposes. corruption is allow ing a child under the age of consent to witness sexual abuse or sexual activities for sexual purposes. since january these acts have been made criminal offences in article d and e respec tively of the dutch criminal code. the criminalisation of these acts came to form part of legislation in the netherlands following the ratification of the lanzarote convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse treaty series . see . for further details. ouders bieden dochter van aan voor seks parents offer their year old daughter for sex ad.nl june avail able at www.ad.nl ad nl binnenland article detail ouders bieden dochter van aan voor seks.dhtml viewed september . http www.ad.nl http www.ad.nl ad nl binnenland article detail ouders bieden dochter van aan voor seks.dhtml the phenomenon of child pornography parents offered young daughter due to large debts the buyer who was arrested in his hometown of heusden on wednesday is also suspected of child abuse. the public prosecution service om confirmed that photographs found at his home showed him abusing a girl. it is not clear whether the child is the girl from hardinxveld. . developments over time . . introduction the core of the phenomenon of child pornography victims perpetrators and visual technology has evolved over the course of time. the invention of photography in was a determining factor in the emergence of child abuse images. many other technological developments that followed on from pho tography have provided new means for perpetrators to victimise individuals produce images distribute those images and view them. the development of child pornography in the netherlands can be illustrated by referring to three time periods from the late s onwards. these periods show us how the relationship between victims perpetrators and technology has developed over time. from the late s to the early s the liberal spirit of the age gave rise to an increase in the production distribution and possession of child abuse images. as a phenomenon it literally became visible due to the fact that child por nography magazines were freely available. once the spirit of the age changed in the early s and attitudes towards the phenomenon of child pornography changed along with it it became less visible. the large scale commercial circuit faded into the background though the amateur circuit continued to proliferate . . see also . . in the period from the mid s to the present day . . ict has made the production distribution and possession of child abuse material more widely accessible and has once again brought the phenomenon into the public eye. the rise of ict has also caused the phenomenon to become less clear cut. acts that were previously inconceivable due to the state of technology such as a hacker secretly switching on a child s webcam are now amongst the possibilities. . . the period up to the mid s although sexual activities involving children whether alone or with others actively or passively have always been a subject of artistic expression the invention of photography in formed a determin ing factor in the creation of child abuse images. photography forms a very accurate approximation of reality. sexual acts and actors are reproduced exactly and the image of this forms a permanent record ouders boden dochtertje aan vanwege zware schulden parents offered young daughter due to large debts ad.nl june available at www.ad.nl ad nl binnenland article detail dochtertje voor seks aangeboden wegens schulden.dhtml viewed september . ferraro casey pp. . court of haarlem july ljn national case law number bd . http www.ad.nl http www.ad.nl ad nl binnenland article detail dochtertje voor seks aangeboden wegens schulden.dhtml http www.ad.nl ad nl binnenland article detail dochtertje voor seks aangeboden wegens schulden.dhtml child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur of the event. since that time children have also been sexually abused for the purpose of producing child abuse material. since the s the production distribution and viewing of such material have increased significantly and the first studies of the phenomenon were carried out some time later. we can see parallels between this pre internet period and the present digital age. even at that time individu als with a sexual preference for children were in contact with other perpetrators and potential victims all over the world. at that time people also attempted to conceal their communications as is the case now in order to avoid being discovered. the late s to the mid s during the s a more liberal sexual morality developed which emerged partly as a result of the secu larisation of society the development of means of contraception and the increase in levels of education. this decade saw the emergence of movements that proclaimed the principle of free love including sex with minors. on the one hand the production and distribution of child abuse images in those years was the result of the spirit of the age but it was also made possible due to the fact that technologies for film and photography were becoming increasingly accessible to the public at large. although the quality was still poor practically anyone could produce child abuse material and view it at home. there were no efforts to tackle child pornography during the s and s legislation to that end was not in place until the mid s. developments in legislative history article b of the dutch criminal code in which various acts relating to child pornography were made into criminal offences entered into force in . prior to that time criminal legislation in the netherlands did not contain any separate provisions that criminalised acts relating to child pornography. initially it was not deemed necessary either. for example in the early s the government stated within the context of the policy to tackle sexual violence against women and girls that various provisions in the dutch criminal code already ensured that action could be taken in situations in which there was evidence of threat coercion or actual physical violence against women who worked or intended to work as models. according to the government the same argument held true for those forms of pornography in which minors were used as models. articles et seq. were deemed to provide sufficient means of taking action against such offences. it was therefore possible to take action against child abuse images but prior to it was only possible on the grounds of the fact that the distribution of child abuse material constituted an offence and ferraro casey pp. . jenkins pp. . for example burgess de wit et al. . l nnemann et al. . dutch bulletin of acts and decrees entered into force on may dutch bulletin of acts and decrees . memorandum tackling sexual violence against women and girls parliamentary papers ii nos. . similarly in the period prior to the enactment of specific legislation no distinction existed between pornography involving adults and that involving children in national legislation of other countries and the regulation of the material was based upon arguments of decency. a great deal of national legislation pertaining to child pornography originated from indecency legislation. akdeniz pp. . the phenomenon of child pornography by virtue of the penal provisions pertaining to the criminal acts underlying the production of such material such as rape or sexual abuse. child abuse material was otherwise not addressed. this meant for example that the production of material in which a child was voluntarily involved lay beyond the scope of criminal legislation. the addition of specific provisions to make child pornography a criminal offence was subsequently a sudden step the reason for which lay largely in the report that appeared in concerning the role that the netherlands was alleged to be playing in the international production of and trade in child abuse material. the acts being criminalised concerned the distribution or public exhibition of child abuse material or the production conveyance or holding in stock of such material with a view to distributing or exhibiting it. the material in question involved individuals who had obvi ously not yet reached the age of sixteen. the possession of child abuse images or films for one s own use was not a criminal offence. until offences carried a penalty of up to three months imprisonment. in the penalty carried by offences was increased to a maximum of four years imprisonment. trade in child abuse material thrived during this period. in this regard we can make a distinction be tween on the one hand recording the abuse of children in photographs or on film production and on the other hand the technical provision of child abuse material by printing copying compil ing reproduction and or distributing distribution existing material in the form of magazines or videos. presentation by the ministry of justice department of legislation bnrm expert meeting on child pornography the hague february for further details see also . about the child pornography working group under the leadership of public prosecutor de wit. in the early s a legislative bill was pending in the lower house of parliament with a view to amending the provisions in the dutch criminal code concerning pornog raphy. that bill implemented the recommendations of the advisory committee on sexual offences legislation the melai committee . the melai committee had made a recommendation with regard to the role of criminal law in the domain of protecting public morality. although the protection of children from pornography formed an important basic principle of the recommendations made by the committee neither the committee s report nor the legislative bill that followed it devoted attention to the phenomenon of child pornography. it was only at a late stage during the consideration of the legislative bill when the third memorandum of alterations was produced that the proposal was made to add a specific provision to criminalise child pornography to that bill presentation of the ministry of justice department of legislation bnrm expert meeting on child pornography the hague february . for further details see also . . o donnell milner pp. . de wit et al. asserted that this in fact usually involved the sexual abuse of individuals under the age of by virtue of article of the dutch criminal code or participation in that offence de wit et al. p. . de wit et al. see . repeatedly encountered a stumbling block in their own words regarding the confusion that arose when discussing the production of child abuse material and the reproduction the compiling of photographs and the technical provision through printing of child pornography magazines. de wit et al. p. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur even at the time the trade in child abuse material was already taking place on an international level. during the period from to which tate dubbed the ten year madness the netherlands occu pied an international position as a distributor of child abuse material. in addition to material made by professional producers in other countries commercial distributors in the netherlands acquired images for their child pornography magazines via amateur producers. consumers were called upon in such magazines to submit material they had produced themselves. the quality of these images was generally very poor and this fact coupled with the minimal payment for these images could indicate that the photographs were not made for a commercial purpose but were already in the possession of the amateur producer. the consumer therefore played a vague role as a purchaser and producer of child abuse mate rial. their role was a significant one however of the material in the magazines originated from this source. although the commercial trade flourished as a result of the introduction of cheap video cassettes and video cassette recorders the state of technology at that time had certainly also been a limiting factor in the production of child abuse material. in view of the costs and the physical size of the equipment amateur producers were not able to produce high quality material let alone be able to take on the role of a large scale printer or distributor of child pornography magazines. such activities formed the sole preserve of commercial producers. when producing copies of films the quality of a copy declined noticeably with every copy that was made and people generally had to rely on professional photograph developers in order to have photographs developed. we can distinguish between two forms of distribution namely the private exchange circuit and the com mercial circuit. little context is available with regard to the private exchange circuit in the netherlands except for the fact that it existed and operated internationally. individuals used secret and less secret code words and even disclosed their intentions fully to ask for abusive images of children and opportuni ties to abuse children in advertisements in child pornography magazines in the netherlands. the fact that networks of contacts existed in this domain was also evident in the emergence of associations that the british investigative journalist tim tate who also wrote about the role of the netherlands in the s in his book that was published in claimed that denmark was a major commercial produc tion and distribution house of child abuse material in europe at that time. the danish government had legalised the production of all forms of pornography therefore also child pornography from to . the legislation said to be concerned was section that formed part of the danish criminal code at the time. the danish production houses were highly professional and worked with the latest equipment that enabled detailed photographs magazines and films such as sucking daddy pre teen trio and fucking children to be produced tate pp. and see also o donnell milner p. de wit et al. pp. and . tate . rossen schuijer p. . de wit et al. p. . tate pp. . o donnell milner p. . de wit et al. came to this conclusion after having examined a number of official reports. o donnell milner pp. tate p. summarised a couple of personal adverts from the dutch child pornography magazine lolita englishman paedophile wishes to meet a mother with lolita daughter or lady with paedophile feelings with view to marriage and pretty mother with pretty young daughters invites enquiries from gentlemen anywhere who are interested in meeting us or in photography . the phenomenon of child pornography propagated sex with minors such as the north american man boy love association in the usa pae dophile information network in the united kingdom and vereniging martijn in the netherlands. these associations and individuals with a sexual preference for children also had contact with one another. the commercial distribution channels at that time were the same as the normal pornography distribu tion channels such as sex shops and mail order companies and these proved to be very lucrative for commercial producers and distributors. the fact that child abuse material was openly for sale in sex shops did not mean that the commercial distributors for whom it was more important to operate with their merchandise in public than it was for the amateur exchange circuit did not take precautionary measures to keep their identity concealed. the anonymity of perpetrators in both the amateur and commercial circuit hampered their detection in any case. at the end of the s many countries all over the world began to realise that regulations with regard to child abuse material needed to be tightened and the open commercial sector began to fade into the background in some parts of the world. it was before this was the case in the neth erlands. child abuse material increasingly provoked public indignation after the police in amsterdam carried out a number of raids on sex shops and had seized the material on sale there. in the interven ing years the netherlands continued to constitute a major distribution centre. the consequences of the liberal spirit that existed at that time are being felt even today it is likely that a large number of the images of child abuse which are now on the internet were produced in this period. the victims of that time are now adults. the mid s to the mid s during this period society began to pay more attention to sexual violence against children and govern ments in the netherlands adopted a more a more serious approach towards combating child pornogra phy. now that the spirit of the age hampered the large scale commercial trade a strong organised o donnell milner pp. www.martijn.org page.php id viewed july . tate pp. . tate pp. . tate p. refers to these dutch distributors as wholesalers who supply the world with child pornography magazines. proper addresses of publishers were listed in the magazines but in practice they were found not to exist or the addresses consisted of anonymous po box numbers. de wit et al. p. rossen schuijer pp. . tate p. . de wit et al. concluded in therefore after the initial raids by the police that an organised distribution system for commercially produced child abuse material did not exist but that a relatively large quantity of child abuse material was sent to germany and the usa and that it was flowing back into the country de wit et al. p. see also . . taylor quayle p. . lanning vasterman . new magazines appeared on the market of which the contents were legal. these magazines such as the dutch magazine boy love world contained photographs of children of which the content did not constitute a criminal offence and accounts of sexual abuse but also advertisements to obtain child abuse material of which the content did constitute a criminal offence tate p. . http www.martijn.org page.php child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur and international network of amateur producers and distributors remained a sophisticated global cottage industry emerged in which individuals from the amateur circuit made use of new forms of technology in order to produce and distribute material themselves and due to increasing globalisation also travelled to meet other perpetrators and victims. this in turn continued to fuel trafficking in hu man beings child sex tourism child prostitution and abuse even further. research into the nature and extent of child abuse material from this period is largely absent and consequently there is little insight into the production of material in the netherlands. however the fact that it was no longer visible to the wider public did not mean that the phenomenon had disappeared from the netherlands. the material found amongst the aforementioned material that was seized in amsterdam was primarily old and had been produced in other countries. it was also said that a substantial part of this material appeared to have come from the netherlands itself. the material that was seized still consisted at that time of photographs video recordings and mm film copied onto video format. according to the child pornography and child prostitution working group care organisations were not alert to the potential victimisation element of child pornography which meant that there were no records of this either. the period also heralded an age in which the production distribution and possession of child abuse images and films became visible once again. in the investigative journalist tate cited the case of a woman that had been a victim of child por nography at the end of the s paedophiles will always find new ways to obtain abuse and manipulate children. they are always looking for new victims and new methods of getting them . tate already anticipated in o donnell milner p. wrote as a result of expanding access to these increasingly inexpensive technolo gies child pornography quickly mutated into a sophisticated global cottage industry where material was produced in domestic settings and exchanged or bartered for personal rather than profit motives . o donnell milner p. . for example travel guides were published with names such as mankoff s lusty europe and where the young ones are which described where child prostitutes could be found. part of the international amateur network existed in the netherlands. tate p. dubbed this the dutch connection and claimed that wanted sex offenders moved to the neth erlands which they regarded as a safe haven. that was certainly the case with the bj rn tapes behind which lay a british dutch paedophile network. in this case material was produced and distributed in the netherlands and the purchasers of the tapes were spread across the whole of europe. a paedophile ring in amsterdam the guardian march available at www.nickdavies.net a paedo phile ring in amsterdam viewed august . child pornography and child prostitution in the netherlands working group p. . material was no longer compiled and openly offered for sale. it was no longer possible to obtain figures of the victims from child pornography magazines as had been done in research into child abuse material from the s and the early s see for example rossen schuijer . the study concerned an inventory drawn up by the amsterdam amstelland regional police on the basis of investigations in the period and may shed some light on the material that was in circulation in the period . for example the study did not mention computer files containing child abuse material child pornography and child prostitution working group in the netherlands pp. . the working group also noted that it is difficult to distinguish between new and old material and material produced in the netherlands and that produced in other countries. child pornography and child prostitution working group in the netherlands p. . http www.nickdavies.net the phenomenon of child pornography that as far as child abuse material is concerned computers may prove to be the problem of the s . perpetrators would be able to communicate with one another using computer based bulletin boards . the extent of abusive material has increased exponentially since that time. the nature of the crime has changed slightly but over time perpetrators have always demonstrated the need to communicate with victims and with other perpetrators in order to obtain new material and ict has proved to be an ideal means of meeting these needs. however ict including the internet is perhaps more than just a means there is increasing evidence of the internet itself and the social and psychological processes that are involved in accessing it being both a process and factor in its own right that is both cumulative and additional to other means of communication . . . mid s to present in this period it is not so much the spirit of the age but primarily the developments in digital technology that are providing new opportunities for individuals to produce distribute or possess child abuse mate rial and or to contact other perpetrators and victims. due to the influence of ict on the phenomenon child pornography is currently a cybercrime but in certain cases it may also take the form of a high tech crime. some individuals only view material whilst others also actually abuse children in the real world in order to produce child abuse material. terms such as the online and offline world and hands on and hands off acts are used in relation to child pornography but also in relation to other sexual of fences and so in practice there are always more areas of overlap that are developing. the technological developments and altered insights with regard to the phenomenon have given rise to amendments in legislation. developments in legislative history in far reaching changes were made to article b of the dutch criminal code. in the early s the perception with regard to the phenomenon of child pornography that had applied up to that time changed. the police were confronted with a number of serious child pornography cases. the penalty carried by the offences was increased from three months to four years im prisonment. this not only conveys the severity of the offence but also enables the application of pre trial detention and the use of a number of powers deemed necessary to tackle the issue effectively such as the authority to search the premises. in order to be able to tackle the com mercial trade in child abuse material more effectively some provisions were added to the article to criminalise those who make a profession of committing the criminal offences or make a habit of committing such offences. the maximum sentence for that offence is currently set at six years. tate pp. . o donnell milner p. . taylor quayle p. . these terms are explained in more detail later in this sub section see table . and table . . dutch bulletin of acts and decrees entered into force on february . it should be noted that article b of the dutch criminal code contained a further exception at that time for the legal possession of child abuse material for specific purposes anyone who has such an image in their possession of which it has been ascertained that he she is using it for an academic educational or therapeutic purpose shall not be liable to punishment . this provision was removed in a later amendment dutch bulletin of acts and decrees this change entered into force on october dutch bulletin of acts and decrees . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur in addition the criminalisation of simple possession of child abuse material was also taken a step further until that time possession was not a criminal offence. to constitute a criminal offence it is now no longer a requirement for certain acts including having possession with an intent to distribute or display to take place with a view to distributing or openly exhibiting child abuse material rather the legislator now regards such acts as a punishable offence even if there was no additional intention involved. furthermore this also does away with the need to provide evi dence of such intent. the production of child abuse material for personal use and possession of such material in the private domain are now also subject to the provisions of article b of the dutch criminal code. further legislative changes followed in chiefly by reason of international developments. the ratification by the netherlands of the ilo convention concerning the prohibition and imme diate action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour in made it mandatory to raise the age limit in article b of the dutch criminal code to years. in addition due to the ratification of the convention on cybercrime created within the framework of the council of europe virtual child abuse material also became a criminal offence. the words schijnbaar betrokken apparently involved were added to article b of the dutch criminal code which means that it is no longer a requisite that a real child was involved in the production of child abuse material. the terminology in voorraad hebben having possession with an intent to distrib ute or display was replaced by the word bezit possession following a ruling by the supreme court. the possession of a child abuse image also includes the possession of one or more im ages for personal use so the possession of one or more images for personal use also constitutes a criminal offence. from that point onwards and as is still the case now the provisions making child pornography a criminal offence concern three types of child abuse material . an image of a real child any person below the age of years . an image of a real person who looks like a child . a realistic image of a non existent child. these amendments form part of the partial amendment to the decency legislation and therefore also relate to criminal provisions other presentation of the ministry of justice department of legislation bnrm expert meeting on child pornography the hague february . dutch bulletin of acts and decrees entered into force on october dutch bulletin of acts and decrees . convention concerning the prohibition and immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour ilo convention geneva june treaty series and . convention concerning the tackling of criminal offences in relation to electronic networks conven tion on cybercrime budapest november treaty series and supreme court april nj dutch law report with note t hart. see also article paragraph sub sections a to c inclusive of the convention on cybercrime. cf. article of the eu framework decision which also enables a number of exceptions to this in article for example with regard to the criminalisation of the production and possession of virtual child abuse material for private use. the netherlands has not implemented possible provisos in this area. the phenomenon of child pornography than those concerning child pornography. these legislative amendments were evaluated in see . . internet the influence of ict upon today s society is indisputable. to indicate that influence we refer to the pre sent time using phrases such as the digital society or the information society . that same influence also applies with regard to child abuse material. the trade in such material can currently take place entirely via the digital super highway as the material itself is in digital format. this means that child abuse material in analogue format has under the influence of ict largely been replaced by material in digital format. ict encompasses many developments that were already set in motion decades ago due to the development of the computer. such characteristics such as moore s law and other developments that can be related to this law also influence the nature and extent of digital child abuse images and films. moore s law assumes that the calculation power of computers doubles approximately every two years. the speed of processors data storage network functionality and even pixels of digital cameras are in creasing exponentially whilst the price and user friendliness of consumer technology have become considerably more favourable. consequently capacity is no longer a limiting factor in the storage of l nnemann et al. p. . in addition to article a of the dutch criminal code grooming of a minor for sexual abuse and c of the dutch criminal code presence during acts of sexual abuse by minors this also concerns article a old which was later incorporated into the provisions making trafficking in human beings a criminal offence in article of the dutch criminal code. as part of this revision the complaint requirement was removed in its entirety and an obligation to give the complainant every opportunity to provide their viewpoint was formulated in its place article a of the dutch code of criminal procedure . the protection of other vulnerable groups was also tight ened by adding the element of reduced consciousness in articles and of the dutch criminal code. an important aim of the amendments is to boost the protection of minors from forms of sexual abuse. to this end not only was the provision concerning child pornography tightened but also the extraterritorial jurisdiction was extended in relation to the strategy to tackle child sex tourism articles and a of the dutch criminal code . other forms of sexual exploitation of minors were also made criminal offences. apart from that child sex tourism being offences committed by a dutch citizen in other countries can also be prosecuted pursuant to article b of the dutch criminal code using the services of underage prostitutes article of the dutch criminal code where intercourse with children below the age of twelve years is concerned and article of the dutch criminal code where sex with children between the age of twelve and sixteen years is concerned. van der hulst neve p. . o donnell milner pp. . mulder et al. p. refer to ict as a sub discipline of the field of technology. the designation ict is said to be a doubled designation as communications technology forms part of information technology. see ftp download.intel.com museum moores law video transcripts excepts a conversation with gordon moore.pdf and ftp download.intel.com museum moores law articles press re leases gordon moore article.pdf viewed august . see ferraro casey pp. for an economic market analysis in time of relevant technological equipment such as camera scanners and desktop computers. ftp download.intel.com museum moores law video transcripts excepts a conversation with gordon moore.pdf ftp download.intel.com museum moores law video transcripts excepts a conversation with gordon moore.pdf ftp download.intel.com museum moores law articles press releases gordon moore article.pdf ftp download.intel.com museum moores law articles press releases gordon moore article.pdf child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur child abuse material. current high tech innovations that hamper the detection of such material such as encryption cloud computing pre paid smart phones and free wi fi will ultimately also become accessible to low tech users. such innovations are used by billions of people all over the world. the drawback is that individuals with harmful intentions can also use technology now and in the future in order to achieve their purpose. digital child abuse material and ict as an opportunity technology not only presents a challenge due to the fact that individuals discover new ways of displaying deviant behaviour but also creates opportunities for academia and organisations in volved in preventing and tackling child pornography. those opportunities lie in the digital material itself on the one hand and in the technology used in order to produce distribute and or view on the other hand. as far as tackling child pornography is concerned the material can provide proof that abuse has taken place. in the case of babies and toddlers it may even be the only proof that a form of sexual violence has taken place. other digital data such as chatroom conversations links to websites etc. may indicate that sexual violence against children has taken place or is in a preparatory stage. individuals also leave data behind in cyberspace that can form a digital profile. all of these digital signals provide potential information concerning the identity of perpetrators and victims. ict can also make a contribution in the prevention of sexual violence against children. potential perpetrators and victims are both active in cyberspace. this means for example that informa tion concerning sexual violence against children can be provided by the government through digital channels and that ict and its users can make a contribution towards increasing the physical and social safety of these digital channels. taylor quayle p. . we know for example that users of child abuse material have ever greater expertise and use conceal ment methods such as encryption in order to remain undetected. for example it is possible in certain publicly accessible environments such as chatrooms auction sites and peer to peer p p networks to communicate in private van der hulst neve p. solum p. . by encrypting information unauthorised users can be prevented from accessing that information. in practice the public key encryption method is mainly used in encryption. klpd national crime squad p. not publicly available . cloud refers to the storage and processing of data via the internet. in the cloud model data and com puting capacity are available online without it being possible to know where the data are stored and which computers are carrying out the computation. the physical location of storage and computing capacity varies and is not relevant within the cloud model. klpd national crime squad p. not publicly available . govcert . see vrijwilliger kaatsheuvel gepakt voor kinderporno volunteer in kaatsheuvel arrested for possession of child abuse images eindhovens dagblad august available at www.ed.nl regio eindhovenregio vrijwilliger kaatsheuvel gepakt voor kinderporno.ece viewed august . see for example melanie had eerder gered kunnen worden melanie could have been saved sooner de tel egraaf july available at www.telegraaf.nl binnenland melanie eerder gered kun nen worden .html viewed august . http www.ed.nl regio eindhovenregio vrijwilliger kaatsheuvel gepakt voor kinderporno.ece http www.ed.nl regio eindhovenregio vrijwilliger kaatsheuvel gepakt voor kinderporno.ece http www.telegraaf.nl binnenland melanie eerder gered kunnen worden .html http www.telegraaf.nl binnenland melanie eerder gered kunnen worden .html the phenomenon of child pornography ict also forms an opportunity for academic researchers to find out more about potential perpetrators and victims due to the fact that certain characteristics shortcomings of criminal investigations no longer apply or are less of an issue. in particular this concerns investiga tions into potential perpetrators that have not yet come into contact with the authorities. academic researchers can now view posts by these individuals on news groups for example. ict has simplified the production distribution and possession of child pornography considerably. in the netherlands ict has gained a prominent position. it is ranked as one of the countries around the world with the highest levels of access to and actual use of broadband internet amongst the population. the netherlands not only enjoys high internet penetration and has high levels of internet use but also occupies an important position with regard to the internet infrastructure. the amsterdam internet ex change ams ix forms one of the major junctions of internet traffic in europe and consequently various internet service providers isps have established premises in the vicinity of the ams ix. these isps host vast quantities of data such as websites belonging to individuals and companies from all over the world. just as the infrastructure of the port of rotterdam unwittingly facilitates the arrival of illegal goods such as drugs child pornography can also be hosted by the data ports servers in the vicinity of amsterdam. the introduction of the internet is regarded as a breakthrough in the use of ict. the internet is a global data communications system formed by innumerable public and private telecommunications networks being connected together that primarily use the internet protocol ip transmission control protocols tcp and protocols that in turn implement the internet protocol such as the domain name system dns . this turns the internet into a network of computer networks in which the agreements with regard to the use of these universal protocols ensure that these computer networks are able to com municate between one another. services that can be used via the internet include for example e mail peer to peer programmes p p and news groups see . . . . the most well known service is the world wide web www which resulted in the breakthrough of the internet in the general public domain in the mid s thanks to the introduction of web browsers . bijleveld . see for example the study by jenkins of child abuse material based upon posts on bulletin boards. see . . . . see www.ec.europa.eu information society digital agenda scoreboard countries nl index en.htm viewed june . internet penetration refers to the number of households that have access to the internet. see www.nl ix.net news holland becoming worlds key peering harbor and www.prefix.pch. net applications ixpdir show active only o sort participants order desc viewed july . in . . . it emerges that a significant proportion of the alleged child abuse material that is reported to meldpunt kinderporno hotline combating child pornography on the internet is hosted by servers in the netherlands. mathiason et al. pp. . o donnell milner p. . the newsgroups that together make up usenet actually do not form part of the internet see jenkins pp. . sommer brown pp. . http www.nl ix.net news holland becoming worlds key peering harbor child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur four aspects of the internet that also exert an influence upon the phenomenon of child pornography are the end to end principle the use of open standards the global nature of the internet and the private market. this last aspect of the internet entails that networks are owned and administrated by autonomous organisations primarily from the private sector. for this reason governments have in principle little control over the internet. the global nature of the internet means that it is not bound by national boundaries and that data such as child abuse material in digital format is sent irrespective of political and territorial borders. this also means that the perpetrators potential victims and material can come into contact with one another more easily more quickly and more often. the fact that perpetrators and victims can find one another all over the world is also related to the aspects of common standards. the internet can be accessed openly and freely by anyone. children from mid eastern europe for example who are vulnerable due a low socio economic status can also be found on the internet. the internet is also based upon the end to end principle. this means that it was designed as a neutral transparent and very simple communication channel. all complex software and other functions for receiving and processing data are contained in equipment at the end of the network. in short the internet as the communication channel does not discriminate as far as the internet is concerned digital child abuse material is data that is no different to any other data. for this reason the term trade in criminal information is also sometimes used. data is not carried through a central point but can take innumerable routes through the network structure. the fact that the data is located at the ends of the network means that the activities of management monitoring and surveillance of the network are extremely difficult and that attention should rather be focused upon the computer and users at the opposite ends of the network. the question of how to achieve an acceptable form of management monitoring and surveillance whilst retaining the aforementioned characteristics of the internet falls within the scope of internet governance as do the regulations with regard to digital child abuse material which will be examined in greater detail in . . cyber and or high tech crime as we have shown above ict can also be misused by individuals in order to obtain or distribute abusive images and films and in order to contact children with the intention of abusing them or producing child abuse material. when ict is used to commit criminal offences it is referred to as cybercrime ict and computer crime or high tech crime. in this context the report only uses the terms cybercrime and high tech crime . the hightech crime criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse cba high tech crime picture analysis describes cybercrime as any criminal act aimed at committing cybercrime in which the use of automated function in the processing and transfer of data is of significant importance . the literature makes a distinction mathiason et al. p. solum p. . davidson gottschalk p. . ecpat international . taylor quayle p. call this principle edge to edge . van der hulst neve pp. . taylor quayle p. . lessig . solum p. mulder et al. pp. . klpd national crime squad not publicly available . the phenomenon of child pornography between two forms of cybercrime namely conventional forms of crime that are committed using ict old crimes new tools and new forms of crime that would not have existed in any form without ict new crimes new tools such as the use of botnets. the production distribution and the posses sion of child abuse material already existed before the advent of ict. there is therefore actual evidence of the digitisation of a traditional crime and for this reason child pornography is primarily a crime that falls under the first category but that can be used to a lesser extent to commit new cybercrimes. in practice crimes may form a combination of different methods that fall under both categories. for example warnings are issued stating that criminals may distribute infected child abuse material that will install malware on the user s pc. data such as credit card details can be collected by this malware but also by means of direct payments to child pornography websites. if users subsequently discover that they have been the victim of such a form of internet fraud they will be less inclined to report this to the police. a more complicated situation arises if credit card details are used by others in order to purchase child abuse material. victims of this form of internet fraud may then unjustly come into contact with the judicial authorities. an exploratory investigation of cybercrime in the netherlands has shown that cybercrime is increasingly a crime of the people and that digital child abuse material as well has now come within the reach of many people. online cybercrime has become an everyday phenomenon to the same extent as offline crime. stol claims that high tech criminals also exist within the cybercriminal group cybercrime may then be a crime of the people just as in the case of usual types of crime there are also professionals who commit crimes in conjunction with other criminals using technologically advanced methods . according to the cba high tech crime can be distinguished from ordinary crime due to the fact that high tech criminals work in an organised way in which relatively new and advanced digital technology techniques or methods are used involving complex ict systems and networks . a study by moran see . . has shown that high tech criminals are van amersfoort et al. pp. van der hulst neve pp. cite two categories computer crime and cybercrime. where ict can be regarded as a means and a target we call this computer crime. all other ict related often traditional crimes are known as cybercrime. crimes in both categories can take various forms that are closely interwoven and are often committed in conjunction with one another. a characteristic feature of the forms that computer crime can take such as hacking and the distribution of viruses is that they are often highly technical and virtual in nature they have been created as a result of ict and cannot exist without it. by contrast the forms in which cybercrime exists generally concern traditional crimes that can also be committed without the intervention of ict such as child pornography and fraud but that have taken on a new form due to the use of ict as a result of advanced technical means being used. botnet stands for robot network . this is a network of infected computers known as bots or zombies used by a cybercriminal to hijack part of the computing capacity and network functionality of the infected computers klpd national crime squad p. not publicly available . stol . klpd national crime squad p. not publicly available . financial coalition against child pornography pp. . see www.guardian.co.uk technology apr hitechcrime.money viewed july . leukfeldt et al. . stol p. . klpd national crime squad pp. not publicly available . http www.guardian.co.uk technology apr hitechcrime.money child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur also found within the group of perpetrators of child pornography and it is precisely within this group of perpetrators that recently produced material is exchanged. as a result digital child abuse material of the st century is a cybercrime and in certain cases also a high tech crime. child abuse material also always includes an analogue element in addition to this technological component since the ma terial is after all first produced and in doing so children are abused in the analogue physical world. a digital world was created with the introduction of ict. although the digital and analogue domains initially existed more or less alongside one another that division has however become less distinct over the course of time. hands on hands off online offline from a legal perspective offences concerning child pornography include the production offering distribution open exhibition intentional viewing or possession of child abuse material. from a psy chological perspective we are concerned with viewers owners and distributors and producers. the difference between these groups lies in the hands on abuse by the producers and the hands off be haviour of the viewers whereby we may regard viewers of child abuse material as contributing towards the continuation of physical sexual abuse of children due to their demand for abusive material involving children as they do indeed contribute towards the continuation of physical sexual abuse of children in demanding such material. furthermore the knowledge that images exist and are viewed also forms a dimension of victimisation see . . . table . and table . show in the form of a diagram with examples how the terms online offline hands off and hands on are each related to child pornography and sexual violence against children. table . shows that perpetrators of child pornography are currently making full use of new technologies in order to view or produce material see also . . . and that various criminal offences may be interrelated. different child pornography source offences phenom ena and offences that may form the basis of the production of the material such as child sex tourism child prostitution abuse in domestic settings and trafficking in human beings were also connected with child pornography in the past. however ict has created new phenomena and challenges due to the fact that as koops writes this is where sex kids and crime in cyberspace converge. nowadays for example child abuse material can be produced or manipulated in its entirety by computers virtual child abuse material . youngsters also make sexual material themselves and such material can also be moran . see article b of the dutch criminal code and . . . taylor quayle . the claim that every form of new media will ultimately be used for sexual purposes shallit s first law of new media also seems to hold true in the case of child abuse material. examples of this include man beschuldigd van kinderporno via ps man charged with child pornography offences via ps playstation itg march available at www.inthegame.nl nieuws man beschuldigd van kinderporno via ps e a viewed june reply from trotsemamavan on forum.viva.nl indicates potential child abuse material via www.chatroulette.com see www.forum.viva.nl forum actueel gisteren bij dwdd chatroulette geprobeerd en gelachen list messages viewed june . koops . see . . for an explanation of the phenomenon known as sexting . http www.inthegame.nl nieuws man beschuldigd van kinderporno via ps e a http forum.viva.nl http www.chatroulette.com the phenomenon of child pornography viewed online without a user having the material in his her possession. online grooming and the performance of sex acts in front of a webcam under coercion are also new phenomena in which perpe trators victimise individuals. this does not mean that the analogue world has become less important. in fact the offline and online converge increasingly often and the younger generations generally already regard them as a single world. the examples from table . make it clear that the boundary between child pornography and other sex offences are becoming less distinct as a result of ict. technology is not merely abused to commit child pornography related offences but for all forms of sexual violence against children. table . child pornography online offline and hands on hands off child pornography online offline hands on a suspect paid a woman in the philip pines to sexually abuse two children under the age of four years. this allegedly took place during a chat session in which the suspect was able to watch via the webcam. a year old man from zuidwolde was suspected of having abused five children. the man allegedly used his children and their friends in the production of child abuse material. hands off around files were found on the computer and a cd rom belonging to a man in february . the year old was actively searching for child abuse material from to for which he also sometimes paid. it emerged from the official report of the findings concerning the reading material that five magazines containing child abuse material were found at the suspect s home. in total abusive images of children were found in those magazines. parliamentary papers ii no. pp. . since january article b of the dutch criminal code also contains provisions to make gaining access to child abuse material by means of information and communication technology a criminal offence. this tightening of legislation is deemed desirable as the question arose as to whether action could be taken on the grounds of possession in all cases. see also . with regard to recent legislative amendments. movisie p. . twee amstelveners in zedenzaak voor rechter two citizens from amstelveen appear in court on sexual abuse charges de telegraaf june available at www.telegraaf.nl binnenland amstelven ers voor de rechter .html p viewed june . vader verdacht van maken kinderporno father suspected of making child abuse material nos december available at nos.nl artikel vader verdacht van maken kinderporno.html viewed june . court of arnhem march ljn bl . court of zutphen october ljn bk . http www.telegraaf.nl binnenland amstelveners voor de rechter .html p http nos.nl artikel vader verdacht van maken kinderporno.html child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table . sexual violence against children online offline and hands on hands off sexual violence against children online offline hands on a man intent on finding power and thrills attempted to lure underage girls into his power via msn chat rooms on the internet. in order to make the girls carry out sex acts in front of a webcam he frightened them by threatening to post photographs of them taken from the social networking site hyves onto a sex website and in one case he actually did so. he was also able to retrieve their telephone numbers and he threatened to harm the girls parents or to set their house on fire. only one girl allowed herself to become so afraid that she actually complied with the perpetrator s perverse wishes in front of the webcam. in doing so she was forced to perform sex acts with a hairbrush whilst naked of which the perpetrator made images. the court of arnhem sentenced a year old man to eighteen months imprisonment six of which suspended for the sexual abuse of with certainty at least nine boys in bangladesh. the man was alleged to have committed these offences in a shelter for street children one of which he had set up himself. the abuse was alleged to have taken place between january and august . hands off in the period from october to november inclusive the suspect made contact with girls via msn under the name olaf from his home in veghel and used an e mail address. he held conversations of a sexual nature with the girls. when questioned by the girls as to how old he was he replied that he was years old. he asked the girls to switch the webcam on. when the connection was made a photograph of a boy with a cap appeared which was not a photograph of the suspect. the suspect had obtained that photograph from the internet and used it to remain anony mous. on the webcam screen the suspect allowed it to be visible that he was hold ing his genitals and was masturbating. a suspect was guilty of the sexual cor ruption of three girls of years of age. the offence was that he approached them suddenly when they went to relieve themselves in the woods and in their vicinity let his trousers down took hold of his penis showed it to them and shook it or waved it around. the individuals who reported the incidents stated that they were shocked at the behaviour of the suspect and or were afraid. the sus pect was therefore guilty of the offence against the three minors which has been a criminal offence by virtue of article d of the dutch criminal code since january . the purpose of this article is to protect minors and to tackle abnor mal sexual and personal development. the examples in table . and table . show that the legal boundary between child pornography and other forms of sexual violence has become more blurred and consequently more complex. the phenomenon of child pornography . legal framework article b of the dutch criminal code this section contains a more detailed description of the legal framework concerning child pornography. for this purpose we will first of all examine the rationale behind the criminal provisions of article b of the dutch criminal code the protection of the child and the broad context in which the phenom enon of child pornography and the strategy to tackle it must be viewed. this will be followed by a short description of international regulations and the legislation in other countries will also be discussed briefly. we will conclude the section with a description of the most recent legislative amendments in the netherlands and the legislative text as it currently stands. rationale protection of the child child pornography is more than material that constitutes a criminal offence. the protection of chil dren from sexual violence forms the basis of the provisions that criminalise child pornography. in the lanzarote convention child pornography is regarded as a form of sexual exploitation of chil dren. the purpose of the convention which was drawn up in is threefold . to prevent and tackle the sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children . to safeguard the rights of children who are the victims of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse and . to promote national and international cooperation in the fight against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children. the convention is concerned with the protection of children in a broad sense. in addition to criminal provisions and provi sions concerning sanctions the convention incorporates preventative and protective measures proce dural rules intervention measures and measures that relate to national coordination and international cooperation. the lanzarote convention specifically refers to the sexual violence against children in which a digital element is involved. this is the first convention in which the regulations take account of technological developments against the background of providing general protection for children from sexual violence. the convention therefore forms an important starting point in the protection of children from sexual violence and consequently also for the strategies for tackling child pornography. in general elements of sexual abuse violence and or sexual exploitation are found in child pornogra phy. article b of the dutch criminal code distinguishes the production forms of distribution and forms of intentional viewing of child abuse material. when a distinction is made between van der hulst neve p. . supreme court december ljn bo . for a detailed description of the legal framework concerning sexual abuse of children who are placed under the responsibility of the government in institutions and with foster parents see j.j. wiarda . the terms child pornography and sexual abuse do not actually appear as such in the dutch criminal code. convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote con vention lanzarote october treaty series . the convention was ratified by the nether lands on march and entered into force in the netherlands on july treaty series . bullens p. o donnell milner p. . in this report distribution is understood to include the following distribution offering open exhibi tion import transit export and acquisition. in the present report the elements possession and gaining access to from article b of the dutch criminal code are both incorporated in the term intentional viewing . this also concerns individuals who download material. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur hands on production on the one hand and hands off viewing and distribution of such material on the other hand it is clear that the provisions making production an offence are based upon the fact that production involves sexual acts that could harm the child either because involving the child in such behaviour is in itself harmful or is harmful due to the publication of the material concerned. the fact that child pornography in itself constitutes sexual abuse of children is also recognised inter nationally. the production of child abuse material can exacerbate the sexual violence since the images emphasise the powerlessness and humiliation of the victim. in addition in those cases that involve abuse the abuse may increase in duration and severity due to the fact that the child is made to perform acts in front of the camera. in the literature the intentional viewing and distribution of the material are regarded as constituting punishable offences due to the fact that a child is abused by the publication of the material . victims of child pornography experience harmful consequences due to the permanent circulation of images on the internet. in addition the legislator argues that children must be protected from behaviour or manifestations that contribute towards a sub culture that promotes sexual abuse of children. this view closely reflects the functions that child abuse ma terial can fulfil as far as users are concerned described in . . . it is used amongst other purposes to corrupt and blackmail children and to normalise a sexual interest in children amongst adults. further to this the implementation provisions concerning child pornography aanwijzing kinderpor nografie also assume that both the child who is directly involved in the production of child abuse material and the child in general must be protected. that applies to children in the netherlands as well as children elsewhere. child abuse the phenomenon of child pornography and the strategy to tackle it must be viewed and approached in a broad context since whenever child abuse material is found it usually means that child abuse has taken place. child abuse is all the actions of parents or of other individuals with whom a child has a relationship of dependency that constitute a severe harmful effect upon the child or a threat to the safety or welfare of the child. child abuse may take the form of sexual abuse. taylor quayle pp. bullens p. . parliamentary papers ii no. b p. taylor quayle p. . see for example parliamentary assembly of the council of europe sexual exploitation of children zero tolerance resolution . o donnell milner pp. . taylor quayle pp. . parliamentary papers ii no. p. taylor quayle p. . see also . . . see explanatory memorandum parliamentary papers ii no. p. memorandum of reply parliamentary papers i no. b p. . o donnell milner pp. . implementation provisions concerning child pornography aanwijzing kinderpornografie article b of the dutch criminal code dutch government gazette december no. p. . article sub section m of the youth care act defines child abuse as any form of interaction constituting a threat or violence of a physical or sexual nature against a minor that the parents or other individuals with whom the minor has a relationship of dependency or of whom the minor is not independent actively or passively impose which causes or threatens to cause serious harm to the minor in the form of physical or psychological injury . youth care agency conurbation of amsterdam bureau jeugdzorg agglomeratie amsterdam et al. . the phenomenon of child pornography un convention on the rights of the child all states are required to take suitable measures to protect children from all forms of physical or mental violence injury or abuse pursuant to the un convention on the rights of the child. these measures not only concern statutory and administrative measures but also social and educational measures. the un convention on the rights of the child drawn up in was the first inter nationally binding agreement in which child pornography formed one of the subjects. under the convention countries are obliged to protect children from all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse including the exploitation of children in prostitution and the use of children in abusive productions and material. when child abuse material is found there may also be evidence of domestic violence involving sexual abuse of children by someone in the household such as a partner or former partners family members or family friends. child abuse and sexual child abuse are forms of domestic violence. child pornography is in principle not a victimless crime. it is a product of the sexual abuse of children in the form of images. for that reason we also refer to perpetrators and victims in this report. child por nography must be tackled on the basis of the core concept that children must be protected from sexual violence and sexual abuse. in order to protect children it is not only the judicial authorities which must tackle child pornography but also other governmental bodies. international regulations concerns at un level with regard to the availability and distribution of child abuse material over the internet subsequently formed an important reason for the optional protocol to be drawn up in which prohibits the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography. amongst other require ments states must put in place provisions to make the production distribution and possession of child pornography a criminal offence. in the same period the ilo convention concerning the prohibition and immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour was created. under the convention the worst forms of child labour not only include trafficking of children and the use of children for purposes of prostitution but also the use prostitution or provision of a child for article paragraph of the un convention on the rights of the child states parties shall take all ap propriate legislative administrative social and educational measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence injury or abuse neglect or negligent treatment maltreatment or exploitation including sexual abuse while in the care of parent s legal guardian s or any other person who has the care of the child. for details of the policy measures taken by the ministry of education culture science see . article of the un convention on the rights of the child. see www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen huiselijk geweld wat huiselijk geweld is viewed may . see also . . . the central motivation behind the criminalisation of virtual child abuse material is that children must be protected including from images that imply sexual abuse. see . . . for further details. optional protocol on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography to the convention on the rights of the child new york may treaty series and . producing distributing disseminating importing exporting offering selling or possessing for the above purposes child pornography article paragraph sub section c of the optional protocol. ilo convention . http www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen huiselijk geweld wat huiselijk geweld is child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the production of pornography or for pornographic performances. it is a short convention that in a similar way to the optional protocol to the un convention on the rights of the child not only requires member states to put penal or other sanctions in place but also to take measures to prevent these forms of child labour and to provide assistance in these matters. other relevant conventions to which the netherlands is also a signatory are the convention on cybercrime and the lanzarote convention of the council of europe. ratification of the lanzarote convention gave rise to the introduction of criminal legislation con cerning corruption and grooming article d and e of the dutch criminal code in the neth erlands. the terms corruption and grooming are discussed at various points in this report. corruption article of the lanzarote convention stipulates that states must criminalise the act of inten tionally causing a child below the age of consent to witness sexual abuse or sexual activities for sexual purposes the corruption of children . the child is not required to participate in the sexual activities in order to have such an activity constitute an offence corruption . this penal provision is new in comparison with existing international instruments. the aim of this provi sion is to protect the child from harmful influences upon their personal and sexual development which in particular concern activities that aim to make a child susceptible to sexual exploitation or sexual abuse. grooming article of the lanzarote convention contains an obligation to criminalise making contact with children for sexual purposes. in the convention this is understood to mean if an adult contacts and seduces a child under the age of consent on websites or chat rooms with the ultimate aim of sexually abusing that minor. the behaviour of the perpetrator must materialise into a proposal to meet the child followed by a concrete action that aims to make that meeting a reality according article and article of the ilo convention. compare with articles and of the optional protocol on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography to the convention on the rights of the child new york may treaty series and . convention on cybercrime . convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series . these provisions were introduced by law of november dutch bulletin of acts and decrees in force since january . each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to criminalise the intentional causing for sexual pur poses of a child who has not reached the age set in application of article paragraph to witness sexual abuse or sexual activities even without having to participate. parliamentary papers ii no. p. . article is entitled solicitation of children for sexual purposes and reads each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to criminalise the intentional proposal through information and communica tion technologies of an adult to meet a child who has not reached the age set in application of article paragraph for the purpose of committing any of the offences established in accordance with article paragraph .a or article paragraph .a against him or her where this proposal has been followed by material acts leading to such a meeting. the phenomenon of child pornography to the explanatory report. contact and communications made by an adult to a child exclusively on the internet irrespective of the intention and the content of the communication are not subject to criminalisation. the international regulations concerning child pornography that are currently in place are not entirely unambiguous. for example where the eu framework decision and the convention on cybercrime re fer to visual images and depiction the un definition is broader in scope. in view of the fact that this instrument refers to any representation by whatever means this could also encompass text and writ ten material as well as audio material. in addition the convention on cybercrime the current eu framework decision and the optional protocol to the un convention on the rights of the child all define a child as an individual below the age of years. however countries may apply a lower age limit by virtue of the convention on cybercrime although that limit must not be less than years of age. the lanzarote convention offers similar scope for exception with regard to the obligation to criminalise production and possession of child abuse material in which children are involved who are below the age of consent according to national law and who have produced or possess images with their consent and for their own use. the various sources of international regulations also not only concern actual images but also realistic and simulated images of non existent children virtual child abuse material but exceptions to these regulations are possible. after the enactment of the lanzarote convention in the european commission eventually presented a proposal for a new directive with regard to tackling child pornography in march . the proposal of the european commission is broader than the current eu framework decision due to the fact that just as the lanzarote convention it not only concerns the tackling of sexual exploitation of children and child pornography but also sexual abuse of children. the contents of the forthcoming directive have not yet been determined but may give rise to new legislation in the netherlands in due course. once it has been drawn up the new directive will for the time being form the most recent development in international regulations concerning the tackling of child pornography with the aim of harmonising the regulations. in addition to striving to achieve uniformity this development also demonstrates that the phenomenon of child pornography is being placed in a broader context along with sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children. terminology in relation to child pornography the fact that child pornography is in itself a form of sexual abuse of children is recognised inter nationally and in that regard such material tends to be described in terms of abusive images akdeniz p. . article paragraph of the convention on cybercrime. article paragraph of the lanzarote convention see . . with regard to sexting . proposal for a directive of the european parliament and of the council on combating the sexual abuse sexual exploitation of children and child pornography repealing framework decision jha com final. council framework decision jha of december on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography oj l january . the european parliament stated in a press release on july that the agreement was to be put to a vote in september and will subsequently need to be adopted by the council of ministers. see for example parliamentary assembly of the council of europe sexual exploitation of children zero tolerance resolution . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur instead of pornography . after all the word pornography seems to suggest that it is glamor ising the obscene content in question. this approach which involves placing the term child pornography within the context of abuse as much as possible is also evident in the response of the european parliament to the proposal for a new eu directive to combat sexual abuse sexual exploitation of children and child pornography submitted by the european commission in . child pornography is also regarded as a souvenir of the sexual humiliation molestation abuse or assault of a child for example in the united states of america. it is also referred to in terms of child pornographic exploitation in order to indicate that child pornography concerns a form of child exploitation. finally the literature also employs the terms child exploitation material and child erotica for all material that is not child pornography as such but makes reference to children and also serves a sexual purpose for the user of this material. legislation in other countries national legislation concerning child pornography varies between countries and certainly across the world. that indicates that countries may view the phenomenon of child pornography on the internet in different ways and may also have different views with regard to the severity and extent of this phenom enon. for example according to the special rapporteur of the un human rights council the manner of dealing with aspects such as age limits and subjects such as virtual child abuse material and grooming vary from country to country. because of the fact that the internet provides a worldwide environment for the distribution of child abuse material it is very important to achieve legal harmonisation of leg islation between countries and it is possible that the problem will become greater if countries do not tackle sexual exploitation of children and child pornography. an initial examination of responses to questionnaires from countries of the council of europe in march also showed a number of gaps in national legislation with regard to child pornography. for example some national legislation does not adequately define the various forms of sexual exploitation of children or the phrasing is too general akdeniz p. referring to save the children europe which states that the term child pornography undermines the seriousness of the abuse. it also tends to oversimplify what is a very complex social problem. save the children europe p. . see also www.ecpat.nl viewed july . see proposal of the european commission for a directive of the european parliament and of the council on combating the sexual abuse sexual exploitation of children and child pornography com final march p. child pornography which consists of images of child sex abuse . where the european commission refers to sex abuse images the european parliament seems to prefer the term sex abuse material draft report on the proposal for a directive of the european parliament and of the council on combating sexual abuse sexual exploitation of children and child pornography repealing framework decision jha cod january p. . icmec p. . see also adler pp. child pornography is a subset of the larger problem of child sexual abuse and the two are inextricable . see for example von weiler et al. . moran p. . lanning quayle taylor . this also applies with regard to punishment legal liability of isps compensation for victims and the protection of their privacy. report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography ms. najat m jid maala un doc a hrc july et seq. akdeniz p. . http www.ecpat.nl the phenomenon of child pornography which in practice can result in a broad interpretation. the term child pornography is not defined is too vague or does not distinguish between adult pornographic material in general and child abuse material. it seems that european countries are taking clear cut steps as a result of the instruments of the council of europe and the eu to criminalise both real world and simulated acts whilst this is still a highly controversial issue outside of europe. despite the fact that in many cases the perpetrators are individu als who are in close contact with children the majority of the legislation analysed does not contain any specific penal provisions with regard to the abuse of a recognised position of trust or custody of a child or influence upon him her including within the family. the application of existing provisions is limited in some countries by controversial conditions for example that the victim is a female minor that the act took place against the will of a minor that the perpetrator must be at least years of age that violence or intimidation must have been involved or that an indecent act involving violence was committed. at present there are still some countries that do not have any specific criminal legislation in place concerning child pornography. according to the most recent inventory drawn up by the international centre for missing exploited children icmec this is the case in as many as of the countries that were studied. of the countries that do have any specific national legislation in place countries do not define the term child pornography in a separate statutory penal provision countries do not include any computer related and particularly internet related offences in their criminal legislation and countries have criminalised intentional possession without intent to distribute the material. according to this inventory only countries have legislation in place that can actually be used to tackle child pornography as they fulfil the criteria set by the icmec. the netherlands is regarded as one of those countries. only eight countries fulfil all the criteria set in this report namely australia belgium columbia france italy the philippines south africa and the united states of america. a fifth criterion concerns isps that are required to report child abuse material to the police or another mandated agency. in the netherlands isps are not obliged to report material although a practice to report and remove child abuse material exists see . . recent legislative amendments in the maximum sentence in article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code was increased from six to eight years. this created the possibility of deploying greater powers that are important in c. schulman council of europe working on ratification and implementation of the council of eu rope convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse cets no. progress to date . era fighting cybercrime and child pornography on the internet lisbon march . the countries concerned include the netherlands antilles certainly prior to the political changes that took place on october . icmec p. . cf. beech et al. in which the authors state amongst other points that in the approach taken by the icmec that punishments for these types of offences must act as a deterrent and must therefore be imposed stringently potential alternatives such as clinical treatment are not taken into account. criminalizing the knowing possession of child pornography may not only curb industry growth but also prevent further incidents of sexual abuse. icmec p. . icmec p. . icmec p. no. . entered into force on july act of june dutch bulletin of acts and decrees . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur effective detection on the internet particularly the ability to record confidential communication using a technical device in a home article l paragraph of the dutch code of criminal procedure . to this end the potential offence must carry a sentence of at least eight years. the powers thus deployed in detection may for example take the form of fitting a device to a suspect s computer in order to trace his her communications with others. by increasing the sentencing term in this way the legislator s aim was also to convey that the systematic production distribution and possession of child abuse material are regarded as serious criminal offences. it should be noted in this regard that the amendment did not arise out of a necessity that emerged in legal practice to intrinsically re evaluate the maximum sentence carried by child pornography offences. furthermore the recent evaluation of decency legislation has confirmed this. in the view of the legislator the criminal court has sufficient means to impose a sen tence that is appropriate in the case in question. a number of amendments were made to legislation as a result of the ratification of the lanzarote convention including amendments in relation to the penal provisions concerning child pornogra phy. since january article b of the dutch criminal code also criminalises the obtaining of access to child abuse material by means of information and communication technology. this tightening of leg islation was deemed desirable as the question arose as to whether action could be taken on the grounds of criminal possession in all cases. it is now also possible to prosecute viewers in cases where it cannot be proven that they intentionally downloaded child abuse material to the temporary internet files folder on the hard drive for example but it can be proven that they obtained access with conditional intent to websites featuring child abuse material whether in the form of images hyperlinks or live webcam streams. the amendments to criminal provisions concerning child pornography in article b of the dutch criminal code are partly the result of new technologies that have enabled those methods of production and distribution see . . and . . . . the offering and acquisition of child abuse material also became criminal offences within the scope of the same legislative amendments. current definition under criminal law article b of the dutch criminal code contains provisions that criminalise a variety of acts that re late to child pornography though the word child pornography does not appear as such in the dutch criminal code. the number of criminal acts listed under article b of the dutch criminal code has expanded considerably over the past few decades. as we have already seen in previous sections devel opments in both the domain of technology and in international agreements have formed the basis for the amendments to the provision. over a period of years the sentence carried by child pornography offences has been increased from three months imprisonment to in principle a maximum of eight parliamentary papers ii no. p. . l nnemann et al. . see also . . lanzarote convention . act of november dutch bulletin of acts and decrees entered into force on january dutch bulletin of acts and decrees . prior to this legislative amendment an individual could be convicted for viewing child abuse material via the temporary internet files folder van koppen p. et seq. see koppen p. et seq. with regard to the question of whether the viewing of child abuse ma terial has been made a criminal offence by this legislative amendment. the element of gaining access implies an active act a behaviour that demonstrates intent. the phenomenon of child pornography years imprisonment if an offender makes a habit of committing an act described in article b of the dutch criminal code. in addition the apparent age limit of potential victims has been raised from sixteen to eighteen years of age. the text of article b of the dutch criminal code reads as follows a custodial sentence of up to four years or a fine of category five shall be imposed upon an individual who distributes offers openly exhibits produces imports conveys exports acquires or has pos session of an image or a data storage medium containing an image of sexual conduct in which someone who has apparently not yet reached the age of eighteen years is involved or is apparently involved or who obtains access to such material by means of a computer system or using a com munications service. a custodial sentence of up to eight years or a fine of category five shall be imposed upon an individual who makes a profession from or a habit of committing one of the offences described in paragraph one. however the custodial sentences stipulated in article b of the dutch criminal code may be increased by one third in the event that the offence is committed by two or more persons acting in concert or in the event that the offence is committed in a relationship of dependency. in the event that the offence results in serious physical injury or threatens the life of another individual a custodial sentence of up to years or a fine of category five may be imposed. if an offence as described in article b of the dutch criminal code causes death such an offence carries a custodial sentence of up to years or a fine of category five. a community service order may also be imposed in place of a custodial sentence. sentences and orders that are imposed may also be suspended. at least in so far as this is covered in article b of the dutch criminal code. however the penalty carried by an offence is partly stipulated under article of the dutch criminal code. article of the dutch criminal code. these aggravating circumstances that incur heavier penalties are also listed under article of the lanzarote convention as circumstances that the court must be able to take into account when determining the sanction to be imposed for criminal offences described in the convention. see also article of the eu council framework decision jha of decem ber on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography oj l january . a community service order consists of community service undertaking unpaid labour or a training order or a combination of both under article paragraph of the dutch criminal code. at the time of writing the proposal to abolish the training order for individuals of full age as an independent community service order is being considered by the upper house of dutch parliament parliamentary papers i no. a. a suspended sentence or order offers opportunities to work on behaviour modification and there fore to prevent any recidivism. however that depends not so much on the duration of the suspended custodial sentence for example but actually upon the duration of the probationary period which is generally two years. during the probationary period the person convicted must comply with the special conditions and is subject to supervision by the probation and after care service. the threat of the suspended sentence being executed in the event of failure to comply with the special conditions serves as a deterrent. the special conditions that may be imposed as part of suspended sentences will be examined in greater detail in . . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . the nature of child pornography the phenomenon of child pornography and related legislation and regulations have been subject to changes over the course of time. today the capacity of being a perpetrator and victimisation of individu als are not restricted to the analogue world but also largely take place in the digital world. this section describes the nature of the phenomenon of child pornography in its current forms. the description of child pornography offences in article b of the dutch criminal code allows us to derive three aspects that can be used to describe the nature of child pornography namely technology . . perpetra tors . . and victims . . . it will become clear from this description that child pornography is a complex phenomenon due to the considerable variation that exists with regard to these three aspects. . . technology technology is not the cause of child abuse material it is the perpetrators who abuse technology in order to victimise individuals. however child abuse material cannot be regarded as separate from technology as the material itself is in fact a form of visual technology . . . . in addition technological means enable certain behaviour namely the production distribution and possession of such abusive mate rial . . . . finally such behaviour serves a variety of functions as far as perpetrators are concerned . . . . . . . the nature of the material an image or a data storage medium containing an image of a sexual act in which an individual who has apparently not yet reached the age of eighteen years is involved or is apparently involved this sub section describes why the strict distinction between abusive material involving children and legal adult pornographic material can be problematic in practice. the sexual conduct the external physical features that indicate age apparent age and the extent to which the representation is realistic apparently involved vary from image to image which complicates the assessment of whether material constitutes child abuse material. this has also been referred to as the grey area of child abuse material. image although child pornography is in principle not a victimless crime the material forms the express focus of article b of the dutch criminal code. the material that constitutes a criminal offence by virtue of the text of dutch law is limited to visual material specifically an image or a data storage medium legal pornographic material includes for example adult pornography and child erotica. the latter is a non legal term that encompasses all material that is not child abuse material that makes reference to children and also serves a sexual purpose for the user of this material such as children s underwear advertisements accounts of child abuse and toys lanning pp. . see for example court of utrecht march ljn national case law number bq . van der zee groeneveld pp. . van der zee groeneveld p. wrote on this subject the text of the article b of the dutch criminal code may appear to be unambiguous. however it can be difficult to ascertain whether article b of the dutch criminal code has been violated as this article raises many questions. what is understood to be sexual conduct what is meant by has apparently not yet reached the age of years how is it possible to determine how old someone is on the basis of just a photograph or a film clip when is something deemed to be child abuse material is a photograph of children playing whilst naked considered child abuse material the phenomenon of child pornography containing an image . audio or sound clips are not in themselves subject to criminal provisions. the same also applies to texts concerning the sexual abuse of children. websites on which paedophiles and paedosexuals share views or describe sexual acts between adults and children do not constitute a crimi nal offence by virtue of article b of the dutch criminal code. similarly accounts of sex featuring fictitious children do not constitute criminal offences by virtue of this provision. it appears as if the freedom of speech prevents this from being the case. the aim of the law is to criminalise behaviour in relation to the material. the behaviour may be directed towards the production forms of distribution possession or obtaining access to a data storage me dium containing an abusive image involving a child. the elements that form part of the law and serve to qualify material as child abuse material are phrased clearly the material in question must depict sexual conduct in which a person who has evidently not yet reached the age of eighteen years is involved or is apparently involved. the assessment of material on the basis of these elements is somewhat more complex in practice however. sexual conduct the image concerned must be an image of sexual conduct . a question that arises regularly within the judicial system is what exactly is meant by that term sexual conduct . this does not have to be actual physical abuse of a minor but could for example also be a photograph of the genitals of a minor depending on the manner and situation in which the genitals of a minor are shown. according to the implementation provisions concerning child pornography the issue of whether or not the image concerned is an ordinary image of a whether or not fully or partially naked child in the family setting forms the dividing line between an image of a minor that constitutes a criminal offence and one that does not. an image that is in principle an ordinary image of a fully or partially naked child in the family setting depicts behaviour that is appropriate of a child of that age and the behaviour was recorded in an environment and in a context in which the child would normally be found. an unnatural pose and or the addition of unnatural attributes render the image unnatural in appearance and may result in that image having to be designated as sexual conduct. in order to determine which material constitutes a criminal offence the implementation provisions concerning child pornography are based upon the classification below amongst other criteria. ma see for example parliamentary papers ii appendix to the proceedings no. in which the minister states in response to parliamentary questions that a visit to a paedophile website in itself does not give rise to a concrete suspicion that an individual is guilty of crimes connected with child pornography or child abuse. leukfeldt et al. . see for example court of rotterdam march ljn bp . see for example supreme court december ljn bo . supreme court september nj see also the implementation provisions concerning child pornography dutch government gazette december no. . parliamentary papers ii no. pp. . the implementation provisions concerning child pornography also include aspects such as environ ment nature and context of the image on the basis of which it can be determined whether the mate rial constitutes a criminal offence. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur terial of category and upwards is deemed to constitute a criminal offence. the classification also demonstrates the considerable variation in sexual themes. production and users collections can also be classified into a narrative order series . examples of this might be images in which children remove their clothes and or gradually work towards specific sexual conduct. indicative non erotic and non sexualised images showing minors in their underwear swim ming costumes etc. from commercial leaflets or family environments for example. nudist images of naked or semi naked minors in ordinary nudist settings and from legitimate sources. erotica photographs of minors playing in an ordinary environment taken surreptitiously and or obviously on the basis of a sexual interest in minors in which either the underwear forms the express subject of the image or the minor is fully or entirely unclothed and the nudity or the minor s genitals whether or not covered form the focus of the image. erotic posing deliberately posed pictures of minors fully or partially clothed or naked in sexu alised or sexually provocative poses or circumstances in which the emphasis is placed upon the nudity or the minor s genitals whether or not covered . explicit sexual activity images of minors fully or partially clothed or naked involving the following minors touching their own genitals or those of other minors masturbating or involved in sexual intercourse with one another. minors being subject to assault physical sexual penetration masturbation or oral sex acts in which an adult is involved also including cases in which the minor performs such acts upon an adult. an animal is involved in a form of sexual conduct with or by a minor. the material in the aforementioned categories one indicative material and two nudist material do not constitute criminal offences. however such images and many other types of material serve a sexual function in relation to children in the case of some individuals. examples of such material might include advertisements in newspapers paintings correspondence between perpetrators or between perpetra tors and children children s toys and written accounts of sexual abuse of children. apparent age the objectified element of apparent age implies on the one hand that the suspect s intention does not have to be directed towards age. a suspect is unable to argue that he she was unaware that the individual on the image was a minor. furthermore this formulation means that the public prosecution service does not have to prove the age of the person depicted in order to ascertain that the material concerns one comparable scientific classification is copine combating paedophile information networks in europe project. this is an eu funded research programme concerning child pornography and the ac tors involved see . . and appendix . taylor quayle pp. . in order to distinguish material constituting a criminal offence child pornography from material that does not the latter is also referred to in the literature as child erotica . the term child erotica can give rise to confusion however in view of the fact that images that are deemed to be erotic category three are regarded as child pornography constituting a criminal offence lanning quayle taylor . the phenomenon of child pornography child abuse material. in view of the fact that the identity and therefore also the age of most victims who are depicted is not known age is generally assessed using the tanner criteria. these medical criteria provide an estimated age up to the age of fifteen on the basis of physical build and hair growth. this means in practice that in the identification and assessment of material in relation to which no other information regarding the age of the depicted individual is available only material involving pre adolescents and adolescents can be designated as constituting a criminal offence. the use of the tanner criteria and the formulation apparent age in article b of the dutch criminal code offer fewer possibilities to protect children who appear to be of age generally to year olds . such material is not classified as child abuse material if only the tanner criteria are used for assessment. this problem occurs in the commercial adult pornography industry amongst other domains. it is not ap parent whether it involves a model of full age or a minor who appears to be of full age. the latter is a case of post adolescent child pornography which from a legal perspective is covered by the term child pornography and also incurs the appropriate criminal charges if the actual of age of the victim is known. the opposite case material whose production involves the use of an adult who appears to be pre adolescent or adolescent is also a criminal offence in the netherlands as this material resembles child abuse material. in this case it makes no difference what the depicted individual s actual age is not even if it is proven later on that the individual concerned is an adult. apparently involved by adding the words schijnbaar betrokken apparently involved the legislator indicated in that even material that is produced without the direct involvement of a real child is subject to this criminal provi sion. this legislative amendment came about as a result of the ratification of the convention on cyber crime that was created within the framework of the council of europe. in addition to the situation in which the material forms a realistic representation of an abuse scenario it is also possible for images to be manipulated and or produced entirely using digital techniques. the legislator refers to both of these methods of production as virtual child abuse material. when the legislative amendment was made in the legislator clearly anticipated that the boundary would be set in such a way as to include re alistic life like images. on this basis it is sufficient for the public prosecution service to assume that the depicted person resembles a child and that the impression of actual abuse is given. l nneman et al. p. van der zee groeneveld p. . van der zee groeneveld p. . parliamentary papers ii no. p. . court of alkmaar march ljn bp . lanning p. refers to this material as simulated child pornography. parliamentary papers ii no. p. . supreme court november ljn bf findings of advocate general machielse . convention on cybercrime see . parliamentary papers ii no. p. cf. koops de roos p. it seems to be better to employ a more restricted designation where we are actually concerned with realistic images as they are called in the convention on cybercrime or more preferably images that cannot be distinguished from real life which the approach used in usa legislation. .parliamentary papers ii no. p. cleiren verpalen ed. tekst en commentaar strafrecht text and annotations in criminal law p. . l nnemann et al. p. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur although legislative history has therefore demonstrated that the boundary was originally intended to be drawn at real life like images it seems that the public prosecution service is making efforts in any case to tackle the production distribution and possession of virtual child abuse material even if the images in question do not represent real life. the implementation provisions concerning child pornography which entered into force on january once again emphasise the core motivation for criminalising virtual child abuse material children must be protected from images that imply sexual abuse from behaviour that can be used to encourage or invite children to participate in sexual behaviour and from behaviour that may form part of a sub culture that promotes the sexual abuse of children . it is partly as a consequence of this notion that the initiative has been taken in case law to take this criterion in consideration and to also make non life like images subject to the criminal provision. in general manipulated material cannot be distinguished from real life material as the former is often composed of various images and pasted together using digital techniques. material that is generated entirely using a computer does not yet appear life like due to the current state of technology. however life like material that is entirely computer generated could form a new grey area in detection in the future since it would be unclear whether the depicted individual is a real existent child who has been abused. the matter of whether acts in relation to virtual non life like child abuse material constitute criminal offences has come up for discussion a number of times in the judicial system but the number of judgments handed down in this field is still too few as to enable a consistent line of approach to be determined on the basis of case law. . . . the activities production distribution and possession distributes offers openly exhibits produces imports conveys exports acquires or has possession of or obtains access to such material by means of a computer system or using a communications service. technological developments have not only influenced the nature of the material itself. ict simplifies the actions required in order to produce distribute and possess view the digital material due to the increase in the so called three as accessibility affordability and anonymity. the analogue context implementation provisions concerning child pornography dutch government gazette december no. . o donnell milner pp. . leukfeldt et al. p. . see for example court of arnhem january ljn as court of den bosch february ljn bc court of zwolle august ljn be court of den bosch march ljn bl court of utrecht november ljn bo court of amsterdam december ljn bo court of rotterdam march ljn bp . o donnell milner p. taylor quayle p. . for example individuals believe themselves to be anonymous on the internet due to the absence of social monitoring other identities can be as sumed and anonymous messages can be posted. consequently individuals are more anonymous to a certain extent than is the case in the real world. however without advanced concealment techniques computers can generally be traced. according to stol p. this perceived anonymity enables the internet to create new possibilities for abnormal behaviour as people are more anonymous on the internet than in the physical world and as the internet is less subject to monitoring people behave more abnormally in cyberspace than they would offline. the question of whether people are in fact more anonymous online than offline and whether they actually have less reason to be afraid of monitoring online than they would offline is not of particular importance here. if people believe that they are anonymous and if they believe that they are not being monitored they subsequently behave as if that were the case. the phenomenon of child pornography also continues to be of importance where child abuse material is produced it is generally the case that children are physically abused in the real world. this sub section will examine the elements that relate to the hands on context of child abuse material produces and the digital context distributes offers acquires possesses and obtains access to from a legal perspective. the production distribution and possession of digital child abuse material take place using open and integrated computer systems using communication systems and within a variety of contexts com mercial and private . various activities within this context present specific problems for efforts to tackle child pornography such as encryption which can be used to conceal the possession of child abuse im ages and films and new payment methods that enable commercial distribution. production child abuse material is produced in a variety of contexts. firstly it is made for personal use whereby the material is solely intended for the producer. the party who makes it may be someone from the vic tim s immediate environment such as a parent guardian a friend of the family or a carer. people also stay abroad temporarily holiday or permanently for the purpose of abusing children what is known as child sex tourism and to produce child abuse material from these activities. a second context in which child abuse material is produced is that of production with intent to distribute the material fur ther. this includes material that is produced with a view to distributing it within amateur networks but also material that is produced and distributed for commercial purposes. if parties behind commercial websites produce child abuse material themselves this material primarily originates from countries in which the legislation and regulations and or enforcement thereof are insufficient and in which poverty or other factors mean that large numbers of potential victims can be found. such countries include rus sia and other eastern european countries as well as various countries in south east asia and south america. however the majority of the commercial websites are involved in the distribution of existing material. the proliferation of integrated computer systems on devices such as mobile telephones the elements openly exhibits imports conveys exports only concern the analogue context of child abuse material see van koppen . analogue child abuse material hard copy photographs and magazines also still exist see court of zutphen october ljn bk . open computer systems are laptop and desktop computers but also servers of isps for example. in tegrated computer systems can be found in devices that contain components of computers such as digital cameras and mobile telephones. open and integrated computer systems are also often con nected to communication systems such as the internet and wireless telecommunication systems. fer raro casey p. . taylor quayle p. . child sex tourism generally concerns countries where monitoring is limited such as thailand and cambodia klpd international police information service dienst ipol p. but there are also indications that individuals from other countries have recently taken up residence in the netherlands with a view to abusing children jahae pp. medeverdachte zedenzaak wil verdenkingen niet horen co accused in sex abuse case did not want to hear details of suspected acts de pers june avail able at www.depers.nl binnenland richard hielp robert actief.html viewed august . ecpat international . van wijk et al. european financial coalition p. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur and means of connecting them to communication networks has also given rise to an expansion in the number of ways in which child abuse material can be distributed and produced. distribution and offering commercial child pornography websites are generally set up and maintained by individual criminals and criminal organisations. however we cannot rule out that preferential offenders see . . also become involved in the production and distribution of commercial child abuse material. this type of material ac counts for a relatively small proportion of the total supply of child abuse material on the internet which includes both so called pay to view websites where an individual may take out a subscription and is sub sequently able to view child abuse material for a certain period of time and websites where an individual may pay per file. commercial websites also face an economic problem due to the fact that on the one hand the vendor must keep his her wares concealed but on the other hand also needs to advertise the website. once the blatant offering of material via websites became too risky an alternative combination then emerged in the form of the website newsgroup in which the website consisted of a portal featuring advertisements and was backed up by a payment site. advertising took place via the newsgroups in the form of newsgroup messages. subsequently the website spam combination was also observed. this involved a similar type of website however the advertising took place in the form of spam. this immediately became the achilles heel of the commercial circuit providers must reveal their location otherwise they would not sell anything. a recent study by the european financial coalition concluded that the number of commercial websites that offer child abuse material has declined drastically and that the profits are minimal. however various new payment systems and modi operandi have been observed. the rate of innovation within commer cial circuit is high and that manifests itself in the form of displacement effects on the internet as well as in other ways. according to the national threat assessment nationaal dreigingsbeeld ndb from there see verkrachting gehandicapte deels w l bij cordaan rape of disabled girl did in fact partly take place at cord aan parool march available at www.parool.nl parool nl amsterdam zuidoost ar ticle detail verkrachtiging gehandicapte deels wel bij cordaan.dhtml viewed july stiefvader kon het stiekem filmen van stiefdochter niet laten stepfather could not desist from secretly filming stepdaughter noordhollands dagblad february available at www.noordhollandsd agblad.nl nieuws stadstreek article .ece stiefvader kon het stiekem filmen van stiefdochter niet laten viewed july . mitchell et al. european financial coalition . european financial coalition p. provides four possible reasons as to why individuals purchase commercial child abuse material. buyers may be inexperienced in seeking itand may not yet know how that child abuse material can be obtained for free some buyers are habitual collectors and want to be sure that they have complete series buyers may believe that commercial websites provide greater security from discovery by investigative authorities than p p exchange programmes or buyers hope to receive new material from commercial websites. leukfeldt et al. p. . the national threat assessment ndb wrote that the decision was taken not to conduct any further investigation into the production and distribution of child abuse material as the organised nature as far as the situation in the netherlands is concerned has been called into doubt. the ndb continued that in no research data was available to provide an impression of the nature and extent of ama teur networks. it is a domain in which investigative authorities have difficulty in gaining an insight klpd international police information service dienst ipol pp. . http www.parool.nl parool nl amsterdam zuidoost article detail verkrachtiging gehandicapte deels wel bij cordaan.dhtml http www.noordhollandsdagblad.nl nieuws stadstreek article .ece stiefvader kon het stiekem filmen van stiefdochter niet laten http www.noordhollandsdagblad.nl nieuws stadstreek article .ece stiefvader kon het stiekem filmen van stiefdochter niet laten http www.noordhollandsdagblad.nl nieuws stadstreek article .ece stiefvader kon het stiekem filmen van stiefdochter niet laten the phenomenon of child pornography are no indications that groups in the netherlands are involved in commercial production and distribution. the ndb also showed that there is little insight into the involvement of dutch groups in the production of child abuse material in other countries. what is clear however is that dutch payment processing compa nies are involved in processing the flow of funds and that servers located in the netherlands are being used to host child abuse material. distribution within amateur networks also known as paedophile networks usually takes place within more or less organised networks or newsgroups that use protected areas of the internet see also . . . within these networks encrypted e mail and files group based communication via chat channels such as internet relay chat irc and microsoft network messenger msn and peer to peer p p exchange programs are used in which documents never actually appear on the network and are therefore more difficult to trace. these p p programs enable shared folders to be created automatically in which files can be shared with other users of an exchange program. from a legal perspective material in this situation is supplied on the one side and acquired on the other. it is not known what proportion of child abuse material is distributed on the internet via which route and it is likely that p p programs such as gnutella and bittorrent are the ones that are most popularly used for distribution purposes. what is clear however is that the means of distribution is subject to change partly due to the fact that the suppliers of child abuse material are responding to repressive measures and partly because new technical means are always emerging. possession and obtaining access to child abuse material in analogue format was and still remains fairly bulky and a large quantity of hard copy material occupies a considerable amount of space. with the introduction of ict and the subsequent shift from analogue to digital the access to and storage of child abuse material has been vastly simplified. it is frequently the case that individuals are tracked down who have many hundreds of thousands and sometimes even millions of digital images in their possession. previously large col lections reflected the time and effort that someone had spent on them but today large quantities are more likely to reflect the speed of an individual s internet connection. some perpetrators deliber ately store large quantities of digital data relating to sexual violence against children on the computer. klpd international police information service dienst ipol . ak zensur german working group against internet blocking and censorship p. . this study refers to a russian language child pornography website with an indian domain name .in that is hosted from within the netherlands. van der hulst neve pp. o donnell milner pp. . see court of the hague november ljn bo . prior to the legislative amendment of janu ary act of november dutch bulletin of acts and decrees entered into force on january dutch bulletin of acts and decrees a legal precedent was set van koppen pp. in which the court ruled that this form of supplying child abuse material constituted a form of passive distribution see for example court of appeal of den bosch october dutch law reports . liberatore et al. . leukfeldt et al. p. taylor quayle p. . o donnell milner pp. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur digital indications of the possession of child abuse material can also be found in all manner of other locations on the computer such as folders created automatically by the operating system the recycle bin temporary internet files and unallocated clusters. in addition to deliberate storage and intent the power of disposal of the material on the part of a suspect forms a key legal concept in securing a convic tion for possession of child abuse material. this power of disposal is important due to the fact that with the appropriate knowledge and means it is also possible to temporarily view delete or conceal abusive material in the aforementioned less accessible locations of a computer. unemptied recycle bins soon allow power of disposal to be demonstrated for example. these files can be easily recovered by the user and with the appropriate knowledge and means it is also possible to retrieve files contain ing child abuse material on unallocated clusters. what is more child pornography users just as other computer users companies and authorities are increasingly taking security measures in order to obtain files anonymously by using masking ip addresses proxy servers and or encrypting files using encryption programs such as truecrypt. at present it is in fact not possible or barely possible to break through such programs due to the technologies used no backdoor development structure open sources and security measures plausible deniability . encryption is not only used in open and inte grated computer systems but also in communication systems. this raises another point previously computers were primarily centred around hard drives. although the open computer systems desktop or laptop computers and increasingly the integrated computer systems mobile telephone e reader still function as data storage devices these devices are now almost always network oriented due to the use of internet services such as e mail chat and p p programs. computers are no longer isolated but are connected to one another and this means that child abuse material does not have to be in an individual s possession on his her own computer it can also exist remotely due to cloud computing ftp servers hosting sites and web based e mail accounts. material can also be viewed on websites in real life. this last form of intentional viewing of child abuse material is what the legislator sought to criminalise with the addition of zich toegang verschaft tot obtains access to to article b of the dutch criminal code see also . . these factors have been taken from van koppen pp. . court of maastricht may ljn bd court of den bosch december ljn bg . this is the section of the hard drive that can no longer be accessed by a standard computer user and which contains deleted files that can be partially overwritten. files that have been removed from the recycle bin are also found in the unallocated clusters. see for example www.recovermyfiles.com data recovery software.php viewed july . software also exists for the opposite purpose the permanent deletion of data on unallocated clusters see for example www.whitecanyon.com wipedrive erase hard drive.php viewed july . a proxy server enables access to the internet without an individual s own ip address being visible on the internet klpd national crime squad p. not publicly accessible . see www.truecrypt.org faq for an explanation of the terms backdoor open sources and plausible deni ability viewed july . solum p. . see for example encryption on skype www.skype.com intl en security detailed security viewed july . ferraro casey p. . parliamentary papers ii no. pp. . the legislator argues that online payment traffic or the discovery of passwords and log in details together with historical data concerning websites visited could provide proof that an individual intentionally obtained access to child abuse material. http www.recovermyfiles.com data recovery software.php http www.whitecanyon.com wipedrive erase hard drive.php http www.truecrypt.org faq http www.skype.com intl en security detailed security the phenomenon of child pornography . . . functions of child abuse material for perpetrators as far as perpetrators are concerned the production distribution and possession of child abuse mate rial can perform various functions. it may involve the production and or possession for the individual him herself or making contact with other perpetrators or with victims. this illustrates that material can also serve as a means or as a goal within the context of other offences such as coercion grooming and trafficking in human beings. individual perpetrators the viewing of abusive films or images may serve to elicit sexual arousal and provide gratification. another function for the individual user of child pornography is that viewing material may provide some justification or serve as a neutralisation technique with regard to an individual s own sexual preference for children. if the children who are depicted are not crying or otherwise showing a negative emotion it may create the impression that the children are involved in the sexual conduct voluntarily and or are experiencing pleasure from it but also that the individual s behaviour is normal in view of the fact that many other individuals are also involved in child abuse material. the production of material may also serve as a souvenir of sexual abuse of children in the past. in addition the collection and organisation of images into collections and finding missing images within a series may serve an important function within the lives of perpetrators. the time that an individual devotes to collecting child abuse material in the virtual world can also provide a means of escaping from unfulfilling relationships in the analogue world. child abuse material can even have a therapeutic effect in that the collection of material can serve as a release for emotions such as anger or as a means for individuals with a sexual preference for children to discover their sexual identity. perpetrators in contact with one another child abuse material is also used as a means of communication profit exchange or access between perpetrators. for example the distribution and display of material to others give rise to mutual trust and as far as perpetrators are concerned this demonstrates to one another that they share the same interest. in this way child abuse material facilitates social relationships between perpetrators. the material may also provide access to perpetrator networks and provides a means of receiving new images or financial payment. taylor quayle p. lanning p. . o donnell milner p. . o donnell milner p. . taylor quayle p. . taylor quayle pp. . taylor quayle pp. . o donnell milner p. . taylor quayle pp. . lanning p. . a thriving commercial industry in child erotica also exists. there is a con stant demand in the netherlands for child erotica and pre adolescent model websites capitalise on this see www.google.com insights search q preteen torrent c preteen bbs cpreeteen model cpreteen cmpt q viewed may . http www.google.com insights search q preteen torrent c preteen bbs cpreeteen model cpreteen cmpt q child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur perpetrators and victims child abuse material is also used by perpetrators to groom children as well as to blackmail potential victims. in this way it performs a function in committing other criminal acts such trafficking in human beings corruption and grooming. . . perpetrators an individual who producers distributors and possessors of child abuse material as well as those who intentionally view such material and perpetrators of sexual violence against children in general form a very diverse group. the categories described below are merely intended to provide the reader with some insight into the various forms of perpetrator that exist within the realm of child pornography. the reality is more complex however as perpetrator categories are not mutually exclusive and the sequence of ac tions within a modus operandi may vary in practice. in this report we refer to perpetrators or offenders with a preferential or exclusive sexual preference for children and or situational perpetrators or offenders. a sexual preference for children need not manifest itself in criminal acts however. in the event that a sexual offence is ultimately committed the perpetrator may have passed through various stages prior to the criminal offence in which there was only an inner compulsion or urge to commit the offence. preferential and situational offenders the literature on child pornography and other sex offences distinguishes between two general types of offenders namely preferential offenders and situational offenders. the preferential offender has a preferential or exclusive sexual inclination towards children whilst the situational offender commits an offence as a result of the opportunity to do so or other contextual factors the committed offender is the opportunity maker the opportunistic offender is the opportunity taker . the literature has shown it is certainly not always the case that producers of child abuse material and particularly viewers have a preferential or exclusive sexual inclination towards children. according to o donnell milner p. . lanning finkelhor . diagnostic terms such as paedophile and paedophilia from the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders iv tr are avoided in this report as much as possible. paedophilia is understood to refer to having a sexual preference for children. paedosexuality is understood to be having sexual contact with children. not all paedophiles are paedosexuals not every individual with sexual feelings towards children also actually has sexual contact with children but not all paedosexuals are pae dophiles not every individual that has sexual contact with children also has a sexual preference for children . o reilly et al. p. . lanning beech et al. van wijk . van wijk . van wijk . committed offender is used to refer to the preferential offender. opportunistic offender is used to refer to the situational offender. smallbone et al. p. . the phenomenon of child pornography lanning the answer to the question of whether viewers have a preferential inclination is usually found in the manner in which the material is collected and organised. preferential offenders generally only collect child abuse material and other material related to children and their collections form a reflection of their sexual fantasies. non preferential possessors with paraphilic disorders and situational offenders may collect child abuse material in addition to legal forms of pornography. these individuals are also referred to as omnivores in the sense of non specific collectors in relation to their pornography consumption. child abuse material is not collected to the same extent as in the case of preferential of fenders and the same degree of predictability does not apply. minors and female perpetrators the age of perpetrators of sexual abuse in general and of producers of child abuse material and viewers in particular varies. minors also commit sexual abuse against children an example of which may involve brothers or sisters committing sexual abuse. in cases of sex offences minors who perpetrate sexual abuse against children may also display other criminal behaviour and inadequate social skills but may also be victims of sexual abuse themselves. a considerable proportion of the available mate rial is made by minors themselves sometimes by means of sexting . in the case of sexting minors who are voluntarily engaged in a sexual relationship have produced images of sexual conduct involving one another. this usually does not involve pre adolescent children but adolescents who display sexually experimental behaviour that is appropriate for their age. it may be the case however that the images are unintentionally distributed and fall into the hands of third parties and the post adolescent mate rial may subsequently find its way onto adult pornographic websites. in such cases individuals may be the producer distributor and victim of child abuse material. the gender of offenders can also vary there are also women who sexually abuse children and or view child abuse material. the number of female offenders is probably less than the number of male offenders but incidences involving female offenders may be underreported. lanning p. . van wijk et al. . see for example court of utrecht may ljn bm . lanning . van wijk et al. leukfeldt et al. p. . weesepoel see . . . and . . . leuw et al. . bartol bartol p. . lanning p. finkelhor et al. p. . for example of the images that were processed by the victim identification team of the british ceop organisation between and were produced by youngsters themselves. h. white con ference indecent images of children ceop march . see also weesepoel mclaughlin . weesepoel pp. . seigfried et al. taylor quayle pp. groep zweedse vrouwen verdacht van kinderporno group of swedish women suspected of child pornography offences ad september available at www.ad.nl ad nl buitenland article detail groep zweedse vrouwen verdacht van kinderporno.dhtml viewed july . see also . . . taylor quayle p. . http www.ad.nl ad nl buitenland article detail groep zweedse vrouwen verdacht van kinderporno.dhtml child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur relationship between abuse and child pornography determining the exact nature of the relationship between the viewing of child abuse material and ac tual physical abuse is complicated. in any case there seems to be a positive correlation between hands on perpetrators of child abuse and the possession of child abuse material on their computers. however we cannot conclude from this that committing acts of abuse constitutes a progression from the viewing of child abuse material. the most common hypothesis in the literature is that there is no causal relationship between the viewing of child abuse material and committing hands on offences. the viewing of such material by itself therefore does not by definition constitute a risk factor that leads to a hands on sex offence seeking child abuse material is the result of a sexual interest in children not the cause of it. a meta analysis by seto et al. indicated that approximately half of convicted viewers of child abuse images and films admitted to also having committed a hands on offence. it also emerged from this study that a group of hands off offenders attempted to contact minors over the internet but did not succeed in doing so and therefore ultimately no hands on offence was committed. in addition the study team concluded that a preferential sexual interest in children by itself does not have to lead to hands on offences being committed. they also observed that the offenders who actually made their sexual desires become a reality probably also possessed the personality traits and were in such situational circumstances that facilitate abuse offences and criminal activity in general. however child abuse material could reinforce any sexual fantasies and needs to physically abuse children. the viewing of abusive images and films could act as a means of normalising the sexual abuse of children and could reinforce the desire to actually commit sexual abuse offences. the viewing of images in which children are being sexually abused may give rise to cognitive distortions making it easier to cross the threshold of actual physical abuse. contact with other individuals with a sexual preference for children via the internet could also serve to neutralise and legitimise the sexual abuse of children. furthermore the notion of increasing one s regard within such an online sub culture may also motivate perpetrators to commit a hands on offence. these hypotheses have never been empirically verified however. relationship between perpetrator and victim generally speaking sexual abuse forms the basis for the production of child abuse material and perpetra tors in cases of sexual abuse are also generally known to their victims. it is rarely the case that perpetra tors are strangers to the victims and as a rule they are situational offenders. it emerged from a study van wijk et al. . a correlation is a relationship between two variables however this does not mean that there is also a causal relationship between the two variables that were measured. seto et al. bourke hernandez van wijk et al. . van wijk et al. endrass et al. seto et al. . lanning p. . in other words this activity did not lead to an actual meeting. seto et al. . seto et al. . quayle taylor taylor quayle p. . quayle taylor . taylor quayle pp. . wolak et al. . leuw et al. p. lanning . the phenomenon of child pornography of paedosexual delinquency by the wodc that the perpetrator was a complete stranger to the victim in less than of all cases committed paedosexual offences . in more than a third of paedosexual offences that were committed the perpetrator was a step foster parent of the victim. in addition individuals other than parents who are entrusted with the care of the child account for a large group of perpetrators. perpetrators who met their victim online are also known to one another due to the fact that mere virtual contact created a relationship between the perpetrator and the victim. problematic internet use there may be a relationship between the viewing of child abuse material and problematic internet use. some individuals use the internet in order to avoid negative emotions such as boredom anxiety and depression. there are indications that this problematic internet use can manifest itself in viewing abu sive material and or engaging in online grooming. taylor and quayle have developed a model of problematic internet use . this model supposes that various processes such as gaining skills in using the internet cognitive social factors increased sexual arousal few offline contacts and problematic cognitive processes sexual interest in children low confidence contribute towards problematic in ternet use and this in turn forms a contributing factor in reinforcing the aforementioned aspects a so called escalation process . modus operandi in sections . . . and . . . it becomes apparent that child abuse material is produced distributed and viewed using various technological means and for a variety of reasons. perpetrators go through differ ent steps in order to obtain material and this may take place in open and closed internet environments. the difference lies in the accessibility of these environments. offenders can take the security measures listed in . . . in both open and closed internet environments in order to avoid discovery by investiga tive authorities such as using a proxy server. first of all potential perpetrators must be motivated to specifically . . specifically . . the perpetrators of other paedosexual offences that were committed who were known to the victims concerned other family members friends acquaintances co res idents in an asylum seekers residence centre . neighbours . child minders . carers leuw et al. p. leuw et al. . for example a child minder twice or thrice removed family members lanning p. . it has also been the case that staff within an institutional context such as cr ches or day nurseries sexually abuse children. in the samson committee began conducting an independent study of sexual abuse of minors who have been placed under the responsibility of the government in institutions or with foster families period present . see www.onderzoek seksueel kindermisbruik.nl meldpunt viewed september for public reports from the committee that have been published to date see also . . . quayle taylor . davidson gottschalk p. . taylor quayle p. . leukfeldt et al. taylor quayle pp. . a proxy server makes it possible to access the internet without a user s own ip address being visible on the internet klpd national crime squad p. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur search for child abuse material or a provider of such material. this search begins with gaining knowledge of where information concerning how to obtain such images or films can be found. for example an individual could enter terms related to child sexual abuse into general search engines such as google or search functions in p p programs. child abuse material can be easily found using p p programs such as gnutella and bittorrent and for this reason this is probably the most popular means of obtaining access to abusive material. after being referred to specific open newsgroups or chat rooms via general search engines the potential offender finds him herself in a pre criminal situation. information in these open internet environments is generally legal such as links to child pornography websites or the dis played overview of available child abuse material in p p programs. these open internet environments serve as a platform for discussions where individuals with a preferential inclination towards children can meet to talk about their preferences with others. the perpetrator may subsequently go on to commit the offence by clicking on and viewing links to child abuse material in the open internet environments for example or to download files containing child such material. the term criminal tactics refers to the subsequent choices and actions of the offender when the offence is committed. the possibilities in terms of these tactics are determined by the characteristics of an internet environment. for example the level of anonymity provided by an internet environment influences the offender s actions. an offender can learn to overcome such barriers and take measures to improve his her modus operandi. contacts in an open internet environment may also result in an individual gaining access to a closed internet environment in which new material can be exchanged. a newcomer must usually win the trust of the other members first before being granted access to material. these closed internet environments feature a rigid hierarchy that largely depends upon how often and how much new material is supplied by a specific member. online sub culture in the virtual and analogue worlds there is a thriving sub culture of individuals who share a sexual inter est in children and such individuals have been forming organised groups even since the s. the advent of the internet has also enabled like minded individuals to meet one another online easily and anonymously but these individuals have continued to meet one another in the analogue world al so. a variety of topics are discussed within the sub culture in open internet environments that concern marginalisation sexuality legislation and security. the relationship with what they perceive to be the hostile society that condemns their sexual preference is also a topic of frequent discussion. the offend ers are aware that their behaviour and needs differ from an accepted norm and attempt to seek validation liberatore et al. . jenkins p. . the pre criminal situation can be distinguished from the pre criminal opportunity this is the point at which an individual actually decides to commit a crime for example starting to download child abuse material see taylor quayle p. . holt et al. . holt et al. . taylor quayle p. . see . . . jenkins p. . see van meurs voor de rechter van meurs in court arnhem dichtbij march available at www. arnhem direct.nl berichten van meurs voor de rechter viewed july . holt et al. steel . http www.arnhem direct.nl berichten van meurs voor de rechter http www.arnhem direct.nl berichten van meurs voor de rechter the phenomenon of child pornography and justification for their behaviour online. in this way the online sub culture fulfils a socio emotional function as far as these individuals are concerned. it is a place where they are able to freely share their views. aspects of their sexuality are discussed and information relating to child abuse material sexual preferences fantasies and events are shared. legislation and regulations and online and offline security measures to remain under the radar of the investigative authorities are also discussed. experienced col lectors believe they are unassailable judge the likelihood of arrest as low and have a low opinion of the calibre of investigative authorities. it should be noted that some visitors to open internet forums reject sex with children and the collection of child abuse material as they recognise the harmful consequences for the child and therefore regard the abuse as being in conflict with the actual love for the child. summary using a pyramid model moran illustrates his analysis of digital offenders in the pyramid model shown below figure . . the model provides an insight into the use of open and closed internet environments perpetrators modi operandi and the relationship between hands off and hands on offences. it also shows why child pornog raphy is a cybercrime in most cases and why it can also be a high tech crime in exceptional cases. we can also add to the model that within each layer of offenders we can find individuals who themselves abuse children. similarly within the simple downloaders layer generally individuals who are discovered in investigations precisely because of their lack of technological knowledge in relation to obtaining digital child abuse material the police also find perpetrators who have abused children and have produced images of this but have not distributed them. figure . moran s pyramid model typology of online child exploitation material users ad va nc ed t ec hn ol og y a nd s ec ur ity number of users involved moran interpol experts closed traders open traders simple viewers lanning p. . holt et al. taylor quayle pp. . jenkins pp. . holt et al. . moran . court of zwolle june ljn bm . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur simple viewers the pyramid shape indicates that there exists a large group of simple viewers of child abuse mate rial who attempt to access material in simple ways. some of them are novice viewers who are curi ous about child abuse images and or child erotica. this group possesses little knowledge of ict and therefore use the world wide web and general search engines in order to access child abuse images or legal child erotica through internet environments such as on legal modelling sites . if these individuals pay for material this takes place through online payment facilities such as credit cards or paypal as a result of which they also divulge their personal details. if the perpetrator is found higher up in the simple viewers layer closer to the next group of open traders more advanced technology such as the bulletin board system bbs usenet internet relay chat irc or p p networks will also be used. open traders the open traders group not only downloads and views child abuse material but also distributes or supplies the material in open internet environments. this generally takes place in an unsecured way. open traders use p p the bbs irc and websites. it is likely that online storage and upload services such as yahoo flickr and facebook are also used. commercial suppliers also fall into the category of open traders. closed traders the perpetrators in this group are similar to open traders but take various security measures in order to avoid discovery by investigative authorities. at this level communication takes place be tween individuals by e mail and instant messenger for example and private online communities are formed through communication. access is granted once individuals are sufficiently trusted by members of the group. if trust has been built up between the members correspondence by letter and conversations over the telephone can also take place. members share material within the closed group that they have collected on the internet or produced themselves. if after a period of time member numbers become too great and or the supply of new material declines active members may leave the group and form new smaller closed groups. experts these small groups feature a clear cut hierarchical division of roles and consist of individuals who have been active online for a long time already. security plays an important role. members are charged with the management of material and the delegation of roles to other members online and offline security of the group providing explanations regarding the use of technology or intelligence concerning inves tigative authorities. members not only value self produced child abuse material but also knowledge of the circumstances of production such as the name of the victim and his her emotional reaction. this sub section has provided an impression of the diversity amongst perpetrators. although behaviour modus operandi age and gender may vary all perpetrators contribute towards creating or maintaining the victimisation element of child pornography. child erotica is a non legal term that encompasses all material that is not child abuse material that makes reference to children and also serves a sexual purpose for the user of this material such as children s underwear advertisements accounts of child abuse and toys see lanning pp. . see also for example court of utrecht march ljn bq . the phenomenon of child pornography . . victims victims of child pornography are often victims of sexual violence. the child is first of all a victim due to the sexual abuse that he or she has experienced and in some cases this abuse may actually increase in duration and severity for the purpose of producing child abuse material. this state of being a victim acquires a second dimension when this sexual abuse is recorded in which case the child is also a victim of the fact that images of the abuse exist. the victimisation exists in the fact that the child experiences the consequences of having featured as an object in the material. a great deal of research has been conducted in relation to victims of sexual abuse. a detailed study of the characteristics of sexual abuse of children in general however lies beyond the context of this report. by contrast little is known about victims of child pornography. this sub section will focus upon what is known with regard to the as pects of victimisation that arise from child pornography. these include the situation in which the child is also a victim due to the fact that images were made of the abuse and are available. the consequences of the fact that images of the abuse exist can be severe and traumatic for the child and his her family and also result in a violation of their privacy. with the advent of the internet this facet of the condition of being a victim is exacerbated further. after all once the images have been posted on the internet victims and their parents must live with the permanence of the images in view of the fact that mate rial that has been posted on the internet is practically impossible to remove again for certain. the activities entailing distribution possession and viewing of the images produced victimise the children who feature in them due to the fact that they will continually figure as a sex object and therefore these activities serve to continue the victimisation. virtual child abuse material and victimisation as we have already described in . . . images can also be manipulated using digital techniques whereby an ordinary image of a child becomes child pornography. taylor et al. argue that this form of pseudo photography constitutes a form of victimisation and must also be tackled as such. the dutch legislator refers to these methods of production as virtual child abuse material and criminalises it as such. the basic principle behind making the production of virtual child abuse material a criminal offence is its capacity to cause harm. not all victims of child abuse material have been physically sexually abused. an example would be minors who voluntarily produce sexual images of themselves that are subsequently distributed on the internet. similarly physical sexual abuse does not have to have taken place in the case of manipulated material that is composed of different images and have been pasted together using digital techniques see . . . . see also nyman p. . see also . . leary pp. taylor quayle p. nyman p. . van der zee groeneveld p. . taylor quayle p. . nyman p. taylor quayle p. . save the children pp. taylor quayle p. . see also ost p. . taylor et al. p. taylor quayle p. . parliamentary papers no. p. . l nnemann et al. implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code dutch government gazette december no. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur next we will examine a number of aspects of the victimisation of children as a result of child abuse material. we will successively discuss the impact upon the victims and the characteristics of victims age group gender and ethnicity . finally we will examine the indirect victimisation of the parents of victims of child pornography. the impact of child abuse material upon victims the identities of abused children who feature in child abuse material often remain unknown. conse quently little is known about the impact on the victims caused by the fact that images depicting the abuse of these children are permanently circulating on the internet. in a recent german study of this impact amongst other aspects all of the professionals who were interviewed expected that aware ness of the existence of material depicting the sexual abuse will always result in additional psychological stress experienced by the victim. although many victims are initially unaware of the permanent nature of the material in which they feature this realisation which often only occurs much later gives rise to a feeling of complete loss of control powerlessness helplessness shame and anxiety. furthermore it emerged from the study that victims are afraid that individuals who view the child abuse material in which they feature will believe that they performed or experienced the sexual acts voluntarily. the fact that many perpetrators coerce their victims into smiling whilst the recordings are being produced serves to reinforce this anxiety. children smiling in abusive material in which they feature acts as a means of neutralisation as far as viewers are concerned they can consequently convince themselves that their viewing of these images is less deplorable as the impression is created that the children enjoy featuring in these types of images. pre adolescent victims children up to five years of age are particularly vulnerable to becoming victims as unlike older children they are more open to inappropriate requests such as taking off their clothes for a photograph. very young children are unaware or less aware of the sexual context of what they are being requested to do and consequently they are less likely to report it to an adult. with regard to reporting the abuse ba bies and toddlers in particular constitute a more vulnerable group within the pre adolescent group as they are not yet able or are less able to communicate verbally and have greater difficulty in expressing their emotions than older children. it is therefore essential that both adults and care workers are alert to physical indicators and non verbal communication by these children in order to be able to detect if they are being sexually abused. if very young children demonstrate excessive knowledge of sex or display sexual behaviour that is not typical of their age group this forms a strong indicator of sexual abuse. it is also highly desirable for care workers to be sensitive to such indicators. it is obvious that it is not easy to detect whether very young children are being sexually abused. the existence of images of the abuse however increases the likelihood of being able to do so since images depicting the abuse provide evidence that it has taken place. this is why extensive sexual abuse of babies and toddlers in a nyman p. . von weiler et al. . see also . regarding the results of this study. taylor quayle p. nyman p. muir p. . taylor quayle p. . taylor et al. p. . taylor et al. p. . gunning et al. p. . the phenomenon of child pornography day nursery in amsterdam only came to light once images of this abuse were intercepted. in the case of pre adolescent victims in particular who are after all less able to make a statement regarding the abuse the existence of images of their abuse provides an opportunity for the abuse to be discovered as a result of which they can be rescued from the situation see . . box text digital child abuse material and ict as an opportunity . the fact that images of their abuse are circulating on the internet does not form the central focus in the victimisation of pre adolescent children as most pre adolescent children do not yet possess the cognitive capacity to be able to realise that images of their abuse may exist on the internet and have consequently acquired permanence. this realisation and the accompanying victimisation may develop later in life however and may still serve to traumatise the victim at that time. adolescent and post adolescent victims compared with pre adolescent victims of child pornography older children years are themselves involved in the production of abusive images more often than younger children. sexting a proportion of child abuse material that is available is produced by minors themselves. in gen eral this material is produced for the use of one specific individual but due to certain circum stances it is subsequently distributed and so may end up on websites specifically concerned with child abuse material. these producers and victims are in most cases adolescents rather than pre adolescent children. the production of images by children themselves is also known as sexting . some authors also associate the term self exploitation with such activities which specifically concern images that youngsters produce of themselves or of one another within the context of an intimate sexual relationship. cases of self exploitation for commercial purposes have also been found. in the american national center for missing and exploited children estimated that approximately . of the total supply of material featuring children that was currently circulating on the internet could be regarded as self produced. this is primarily considered to be a conse quence of the rise of webcam sex . webcam sex may have taken place on a voluntary basis but it does not alter the fact that it may be subsequently distributed without the consent of the individual who is depicted. images produced by the victims themselves but that are subsequently distrib uted by someone else often as an act of retaliation may have a traumatic effect upon the victims. see . . regarding the amsterdam sexual abuse case. von weiler et al. nyman p. . von weiler et al. . see also . . regarding sexting and also . . regarding the extent of this phenomenon. mclaughlin . for example a boy girlfriend or sexual partner of the producer. the word sexting originates from a portmanteau formed from the word texting which refers to the sending of text messages using a mobile telephone and the word sex . since then the term has become more widely used in parallel with the developments in the use of ict and youth culture. leary pp. . leary p. . leary p. . quayle et al. p. . quayle et al. pp. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur feelings of shame occur even more often in cases such as these due to the fact that in many cases the victims produced the images themselves. in contrast to young children older children are more aware of the significance of the existence of images of their abuse and this consequently makes them more concerned about the images. this awareness is accompanied by feelings of shame and anxiety and forms a heavy burden in cases where the victim wishes for closure with regard to the events. gender of victims of child pornography as was described above little is known of the victims of child pornography. however it is possible to deduce a number of physical characteristics of victims from child abuse material of which the existence is known. the copine archive contains child abuse images of which more than half feature girls. at the beginning of this century of the material featuring girls amongst the images that depict an explicit sexual activity category five according to the implementation provisions concerning child pornography could be designated as new compared with of the material featuring boys. we have therefore seen a relatively greater increase in child abuse images involving boys as victims compared with that involving girls. this finding is consistent with the claim that the majority of images previously involved girls but at present they increasingly involve boys. in the case of com mercially produced child abuse material the supply of material featuring boys is said to be now even greater than that involving girls. this increase in boys becoming victims is also related to the advent of the internet. ethnicity the large majority of children in the images in the copine archive involving content of category five of the implementation provisions concerning child pornography were white children. asian children appeared more often in images featuring erotic posing. the year saw an increase in images featuring erotic posing that originated from commercial websites from south america and eastern eu nyman pp. . nyman p. . muir p. . von weiler et al. . the combating paedophile information networks in europe project is an eu funded research pro gramme in child pornography and the actors involved. taylor quayle p. . see . . . of this report for an explanation of the different categories. images that are less than ten years old are classified as new . taylor quayle p. . taylor quayle adhere to a different taxonomy whereby categories seven to ten inclusive correspond to category five of the implementation provisions concerning child por nography. see also . . . and appendix . van der zee groeneveld p. . van der zee groeneveld p. . muir p. . see . . . and appendix . taylor quayle p. . the phenomenon of child pornography rope. what is striking is the absence of black children in child abuse material. the precise reason for this is unclear. it has emerged from interviews with perpetrators that many collectors have a preference for slim white children whereby the genitals are clearly visible and secondary sexual characteristics have not yet developed. child sex tourism as already described in . . many perpetrators of the production of child abuse material are known to their victims in view of the fact that a large proportion of material is produced within the domestic circle. however images are increasingly cropping up that were made on location by child sex tourists. child sex tourism is the sexual abuse of minors by tourists and encom passes three scenarios of abuse child prostitution non prostitution related paedosexual abuse and the production of child abuse material. the latter forms a frequently occurring element within the context of child sex tourism. in a study conducted by ecpat international practically all respondents minors working in the child sex tourism industry in nepal and the czech republic stated that they had been photographed naked at some point by one or more tourists or had been asked by one or more tourists to pose naked for them for the purpose of producing abusive material. parents as victims an element that often continues to be neglected in the literature on victimisation as a result of sexual abuse or child pornography is the indirect victimisation of the parents of child victims. for exam ple family members may find themselves struggling with various psychological conditions including depression feelings of guilt shame and symptoms of grief. if the victims are very young it is often expected that the traumatic impact upon the parents is greater than upon the child him herself. if a case concerns abuse that took place within the family additional situational factors or stressors come into play alongside the aforementioned traumatic effects which exacerbate the trauma suffered by the non offending parent s . one example of this is the loss of a partner or family member the abuser . furthermore non offending mothers or mother figures in particular have to contend with criticism they are regarded as passive and indifferent and they are frequently blamed for having allowed the abuse to take place. taylor quayle p. . taylor quayle p. . van der zee groeneveld p. . van der zee groeneveld p. . ecpat netherlands . ecpat international . muir p. . muir p. . see also . . regarding the impact upon and support provided to parents of victims in the sexual abuse cases of benno l. and robert m. the amsterdam sexual abuse case . tavkar p. . tavkar p. . tavkar p. . tavkar pp. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur very little is known about the victimisation experienced by parents of victims of child pornography. in the amsterdam sexual abuse case a child psychologist paediatrician and child psychiatrist were com missioned to produce a report on the effects upon children and their parents. this report is to be completed by the end of . it emerged from interviews with two staff members from the amsterdam municipal health service and with the lawyer of some of the parents of victims in the amsterdam sexual abuse case that the dilemma concerning whether or not to view the images forms a factor that can cause stress for the parents of victims of child pornography. on the one hand many parents want to know everything about the abuse down to the last detail such as whether the child was awake or was in pain whilst on the other hand the viewing of the images can be highly traumatic for them. one consequence could be that the parents exhibit extremely cautious or stifling behaviour where their child is concerned or that parents are unable to escape the image of the sexual activities that their child has experienced and therefore could come to view their child differently. a german study by von weiler et al. in included interviews with professionals concerning various aspects including the effects upon the parents of victims of child pornography. it emerged from these interviews that in many cases the existence of images of the abuse of their child results in parents believing their child more easily. the images are regarded as proof and consequently parents will have less tendency to trivialise or deny the abuse that was committed. some professionals who were interviewed in the study by von weiler et al. noted that parents of victims of child pornography displayed a greater desire to have the perpetrator prosecuted. the fact that images were produced of the abuse of their child and that money may have been earned from it enrages parents according to the study. many parents want to retrieve the material and some even go searching themselves for the images of their child on the internet. professionals believe that this can cause significant stress for parents. . the extent of child abuse material the phenomenon of child pornography can be divided into three separate aspects of varying scale the perpetrators . . the victims . . and the ultimate content . . . the extent of these robert m. zeven weken in pieter baan centrum robert m. to stay seven weeks in pieter baan centrum nu.nl august . information supplied verbally by r.a. korver a lawyer acting for a number of parents in the amsterdam sexual abuse case june . information supplied verbally by the team leader and psychiatrist first line physician of vangnet advies safety net advice organisation amsterdam municipal health service june . see also . . von weiler et al. . von weiler et al. . von weiler et al. . von weiler et al. . after all a single perpetrator may make victims of several individuals producers and possess and or distribute multiple items of child abuse material possessors and distributors . a single victim may be abused by multiple perpetrators and appear in multiple examples of child abuse material. an ex ample of a child abuse image film etc. may depict multiple victims and be in the possession of many perpetrators. http www.nu.nl the phenomenon of child pornography three aspects is unknown and cannot therefore be expressed in figures. statistical data concerning the number of known perpetrators from the police or the public prosecution service for exam ple and known victims from care services for example only represent the tip of the iceberg and therefore do not yield any information about the extent of the phenomenon. nevertheless there is a demand for data that could provide pointers in relation to it. as stol rightly notes in order to tackle a safety problem we must begin to gather information about that problem. the very first question to which we must find the answer is of course how often does this problem occur . as the safety issue with regard to cyberspace is becoming more significant and more complex whilst at the same time we know little about it the cybersafety lectureship was created at the nhl hogeschool nhl university of applied sciences in . within the scope of that faculty department research was and is being conducted into this issue as part of the three research programmes trends in cybercrime youth and cybersafety and business and cybersafety . interesting research findings have already been published in fields including the overlapping area of child pornography and more can be expected in the future. . . the number of perpetrators safety in numbers the number of individuals who are involved in child pornography production distribution possession viewing of child abuse material is not known and is potentially on the increase. even so disput able estimates are published on a regular basis and it is not uncommon for these figures to take on a life of their own. it is precisely because little is known about these figures that many authors borrow information from one another and consequently statistics appear to be accurate also known as the copycat effect . however certainly within the context of child pornography a crime that is so closely associated with the constantly developing online world this must be avoided unless the context in see . . for statistical data concerning prosecuted suspects and convicted individuals in the netherlands. stol . stol . stol . one example is the publication by leukfeldt et al. in . this describes the findings of an exploratory study of five cybercrimes including child pornography. stol . quayle et al. p. . report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography ms. najat m jid maalla un doc a hrc july . in this report the special rapporteur stated that predators are connected to the internet at any given time it is not clear whether they are therefore searching for victims or child abuse material and that hundreds of thousands of searches for child abuse material are entered on a daily basis. these findings are based upon a questionnaire that was drawn up and then completed by governments international organisations non governmental organisations and the private sector in march . for that matter this applies just as much to statistics concerning the number of victims and the extent of child abuse material. leukfeldt et al. p. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur cluding points of note in which the statistics originated is also clearly described. the boxed text below provides one example of this. amongst other details a publication produced on behalf of ecpat international in cited the following estimate as an illustration between and paedophiles are involved in organised child pornography groups across the entire world and one third of those operate from the united states of america. the reader is referred for further information to a manual written for the police in which manual subsequently refers to a study published in . the latter publication shows the results of a two year study starting in of child pornography users on the basis of participating observation in newsgroups and on forums and message boards on the internet. the following conclusion was amongst those that were drawn as a result of this study confirming the general scale suggested here interpol the international police agency has suggested that over paedophiles are involved in organised child pornography rings in europe which began forming through the internet. i stress though that we are dealing with core activists since casual browsers may be much more numerous. it continues putting the different boards together i would guess that the core population as of should be counted somewhere in the range of fifty to a hundred thousand individuals though that is a very loose figure. it is also a global number perhaps a third of these are located in the united states. given the phenomenal expan sion of the internet since the mid s we can assume that this figure is changing very rapidly and certainly expanding. the above clearly illustrates the hazard in repeatedly borrowing statistical data without bearing in mind citing the source and context of those figures. it is obvious that we are in even less of a position to make a judgment based upon statistics with regard to the number of perpetrators in the netherlands in proportion to the number of perpetrators in other countries. however one indication is that in large scale international investigations of child pornog raphy the netherlands always features in the global top ten whenever the numbers of suspects and or suspected web addresses are examined. it can also be the case that statistics are borrowed that are not published without context but are com pletely unjustly placed into a new context. it goes without saying that such use is incorrect. quayle et al. p. . wortley smallbone p. . jenkins p. . jenkins p. . jenkins p. . for that matter the figure from interpol that jenkins cites in his publication was also borrowed from yet another source not interpol . written information from klpd team beeld en internet february . the phenomenon of child pornography despite the fact that the number of perpetrators is unknown it is in any case important to realise that there are too many perpetrators to be able to prosecute them all under criminal law. this can also be called safety in numbers which is something that many a perpetrator is aware of. it may be clear that a means of tackling the issue purely under criminal law will never be sufficient. alternative methods of dealing with the problem and the involvement of the private sector in combating child abuse mate rial therefore form very important developments. . . the number of victims as is the case with numbers of perpetrators the number of victims of child pornography is unknown. for that reason this sub section will examine the scope of the three areas that overlap with the scope of child pornography victims specifically the number of victims of child sexual abuse the number of minors who have been contacted by individuals online for sexual purposes and the extent of sexting . the number of victims of child sexual abuse the sexual abuse of children forms a global problem of considerable proportions. however statisti cal findings from different particularly retrospective studies vary significantly from one another. even if they could theoretically be partly identified. the shortcomings in the capacity of the criminal justice process to tackle child pornography are dis cussed in detail in . . . however even if this capacity was expanded it will not be feasible to deal with all perpetrators. jenkins p. . see . . . see . . report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography ms. najat m jid maalla un doc a hrc july . in this report the special rapporteur stated that estimates of victims of child pornography range from to . these findings are based upon a questionnaire that was drawn up and then completed by governments international organisations non governmental organisations and the private sector in march . the proportion of victims of child sexual abuse who are also victims of child pornography is potentially larger than expected see . . . . contact on the internet for sexual purposes does not mean by definition that a child also ultimately becomes a victim of child pornography but a relationship may exist between these two events. stoltenborgh et al. . in retrospective studies adult respondents are asked to report their experiences as victims of sexual abuse in their childhood. in such cases events are likely to be underreported as respondents may not be able to remember everything from their childhood and or do not wish to report everything. an additional disadvantage is that this type of study cannot generate any information about the current generation of children. this has proved to be the case in multiple meta analyses performed on hundreds of retrospective stud ies of victimisation as a result of child sexual abuse all over the world finkelhor putnam creighton world health organisation stoltenborgh et al. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur this is specifically the result of the variation in definitions representativeness of the random sample and the research method that was used. one example may serve as an illustration when finkelhor compared specifically north american and canadian studies between and it emerged that to of women and to of men had experienced child sexual abuse. table . shows a selection of relevant results from the most recent retrospective study of child sexual abuse in the netherlands. it emerged from the study that of dutch women and of dutch men according to their own per ception experienced a form of sexual violence excluding solely offensive remarks prior to age of . if we examine experience of at least one of the forms of sexual violence listed in the table these figures even increase to of women and of men in . furthermore the forms of sexual violence listed as third and fourth in table . are of particular interest from the perspective of child pornography. in this context it would be interesting in follow up studies to include more questions concerning sexual violence in relation to the internet ict and to report the results in greater detail for example relating them to the age of respondents . for example the age limit varied in each study younger than or younger than years of age and it is sometimes the case that child sexual abuse is defined as including hands off offences and or abuse by peers or spouses in cases where a minor is already married but is in other studies defined as excluding these aspects. consider for example the difference between face to face in depth interviews and an online question naire creighton . it has been found that the more the questions in a study are concerned with victimisation as a result of sexual abuse the more often respondents have reported that they were victims of this finkelhor . finkelhor . bakker et al. . in and rutgers nisso groep since rutgers nisso groep forms rutgers wpf jointly with the world population foundation conducted a study of sexual health in the netherlands within the scope of the monitor of sexual and reproductive health care requirements and use of care provision srgz funded by zonmw netherlands organisation for health research and development and the ministry of public health welfare and sport. as part of this periodic study an online questionnaire was used to ask about aspects including experience of sexual abuse amongst dutch citizens. in the random sample consisted of respondents between the ages of and which after weighting by age gender educa tion level and degree of urbanisation was representative of the dutch population. in this study experience of sexual violence prior to years of age constituted sexual abuse. the broad psychological definition of experience of sexual violence was used which was based upon the victim s perception. this therefore concerns behaviour of a sexual nature that violates the victim s norms and boundaries. everyone who reported having experienced such behaviour themselves with the exception of those who experienced solely offensive remarks were counted as victims rutgers nisso groep and bakker et al. . it should be noted that the sexual preference for children and the extent to which that preference is mani fested in behaviour will also be investigated in the next study niet iedere pedoseksueel is pedofiel not every pedosexual is a paedophile volkskrant july . this is of particular interest within the context of the stop it now project to be set up in the netherlands amongst other initiatives see . . . . . . the phenomenon of child pornography table . experience of sexual abuse by gender forms of sexual violence experienced prior to the age of women n . men n . being touched or grabbed in an injurious manner coercion into undressing producing recordings images of a sexual nature and or showing recordings images to others against one s will being made to show one s breasts buttocks or genitals in a real life situation or on the internet against one s will being touched under one s clothing against one s will coercion into touching another person under his her clothing coercion into masturbation coercion into performing manual sex acts fingering or masturbation coercion into performing oral sex acts attempted rape rape other experience of at least one of the above forms of sexual violence prior to the age of experience of at least one of the above forms of sexual violence prior to the age of according to one s own perception excl. acts solely involving offensive remarks source bakker et al. p. . the number of minors who have experience of contact made online for sexual purposes various studies both internationally and nationally have shown that it is not uncommon for mi nors youngsters to have experience of being contacted on the internet for sexual purposes whether desired or undesired by acquaintances or strangers including peers . to illustrate we have briefly quoted several results here from the youth internet safety surveys yiss which is often used as a source of reference and from a study of the sexual experiences of dutch children on the internet from . finkelhor et al. wolak et al. ceop de graaf vanwesenbeeck kuyper et al. kuyper et al. meldpunt kinderporno op internet the hotline combating child pornography on the internet . finkelhor et al. wolak et al. . de graaf vanwesenbeeck . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the following emerged from the yiss surveys yiss in the year prior to the interviews one in five of the minor respondents was contacted online for sexual purposes of whom were contacted in an aggressive manner. yiss a follow up survey five years later showed that these figures had changed to one in seven respectively. table . shows a selection of relevant results from the study of desired and undesired sexual experiences of dutch youngsters on the internet from . table . online sexual experiences by gender forms of online sexual experiences in the past year boys girls receiving questions of a sexual nature if applicable responding to such questions requested to perform a sexual act in front the webcam if applicable complying with such requests being recorded on the webcam whilst posing acting in a sexual manner being requested to agree to meet someone whom he she met on the internet actually arranging to meet someone whom he she met on the internet source de graaf vanwesenbeeck amongst other findings it emerged from the research that most youngsters in the random sample had experienced having been asked questions of a sexual nature online. it was also frequently the case that finkelhor et al. . in the period august february interviews were conducted by telephone with youngsters between ten and seventeen years of age representative national random sample in usa who regularly use the internet at least once per month in the six months preceding the interview . definition of contact for sexual purposes the request to participate in sexual activities discuss sex provide personal sexual details although this is undesired or if requested to do so by an adult whether or not desired. definition of aggressive sexual contact contact for sexual purposes with the aim of making contact offline such as arranging to meet one another contact by telephone contact by post sending money or gifts . wolak et al. . the telephone interviews were conducted in the period march june with youngsters between ten and seventeen years of age who regularly use the internet. methodological details of the study the random sample consisted of respondents from twelve years of age and older who were recruited on popular websites aimed at young people and who had completed an electronic questionnaire. girls accounted for of respondents whilst boys accounted for . not all respondents were minors approximately one quarter was years of age or older. three percent stated this was possible but they did not know for sure. this was also the case for the figure for girls. the phenomenon of child pornography the youngsters had received requests to perform a sexual act in front of the webcam and it was not un common for such requests to be complied with. the scale of sexting it is not possible to judge the scale of the phenomenon of sexting . the results of various studies vary significantly due to differences in the definition that is applied incomparable respondent groups and the research methods that are used. for this reason it is important that research is conducted into sexting in the future. in such studies it would be advisable to refer to the analysis of five studies of sexting from and and to take on board the recommendations that were made as a result of the analysis. . . the volume of child abuse material the volume of child abuse material that is available on the internet is on the increase. however figures in this regard are unknown but at the same time they are also irrelevant in the context of the borderless and expanding online world. databases in which child abuse material is stored by the police the national child pornography data base of the klpd and the international child sexual exploitation icse image database of interpol are currently unable to provide an idea of the scale of material identified by the police contrary to what could perhaps be assumed. no attention will be devoted to this aspect in this sub section either for further information regarding the databases mentioned see . . and for this reason only a few statis tics will be shown. these concern data with regard to suspected child abuse material that was reported to internet hotlines. it should be noted superfluously that these figures are not an attempt to indicate the actual volume of the material available on the internet. the scale of suspected child abuse material reported to internet hotlines the first internet hotline to report child abuse material was set up in the netherlands in the meldpunt kinderporno op internet hotline combating child pornography on the internet . this was fol for a description of the phenomenon of sexting see . . and . . . for example lenhart one of the five studies of the scale of sexting that was included in the meta analysis by lounsbury et al. livingstone et al. not included in the meta analysis by lounsbury et al. . lounsbury et al. . lounsbury et al. . the following proposal was made with regard to the issue of defining the term youth produced sexual images . this means images of minors younger than years produced by minors which could be are subject to provisions criminalising child pornography. us department of justice baines . us department of justice report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitu tion and child pornography ms. najat m jid maalla un doc a hrc july . in the latter report the special rapporteur stated thousands of new photographs and videos were uploaded onto the internet every week and it was estimated that new images come into circulation every day. these findings are based upon a questionnaire that was drawn up and then completed by governments international organisations non governmental organisations and the private sector in march . baines . for further information regarding meldpunt kinderporno op internet see . . . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur lowed by a variety of similar initiatives in other countries. in inhope the international umbrella network of internet hotlines was created of which hotlines spread across more than countries were members in . inhope hotlines work in collaboration in order to tackle child abuse material on the internet. statistical data from inhope and a number of individual members of inhope are shown in the boxed text as an illustration. inhope in the period september hotlines to december inclusive hotlines reports were received from the public and a total of reports were made including reports generated by the hotlines themselves. in the period september to june inclusive hotlines an average of reports were sent in total per month to inhope hotlines from members of the public. during the last quarter of a further reports were sent and including reports generated by the hotlines themselves . the cybertipline of the national center for missing exploited children ncmec internet hotline in the united states of america during the week of january the cybertipline received reports which brought the total number of reports received since its establishment in march to . the internet watch foundation iwf internet hotline in the united kingdom in the iwf received reports of suspected child abuse material of which was also deemed to be considered as such by the iwf. meldpunt kinderporno op internet hotline combating child pornography on the internet internet hotline in the netherlands meldpunt kinderporno op internet received reports in of which reports were ultimately deemed to actually involve child abuse material according to meldpunt kinderporno op internet this concerned of the total number of reports after adjustment for the quantity of content that was reported twice . please refer to . . . for further statistics relating to meldpunt kinderporno op internet. inhope . they send reports of child abuse material to one another via the inhope network. for a detailed de scription of how the network operates see . . . . since inhope has been working with the inhope report management system ihrms in which reports of child abuse material received by hotline members are recorded. however not all hotlines were connected to this system in and consequently no published statistical data is available as yet regarding the total number of reports that were sent to inhope members in . inhope . see www.inhope.org viewed july . inhope . factsheet cybertipline available at www.missingkids.com en us documents cybertiplinefactsheet. pdf viewed july . internet watch foundation . http www.inhope.org the phenomenon of child pornography . conclusion the following conclusions have been drawn with regard to the phenomenon of child pornography. these conclusions have formed the guiding principle for the investigation of policy and practice and the results of this investigation will be presented in the following chapters. variation in the area of child pornography the phenomenon of child pornography encompasses perpetrators victims and technology consisting of abusive material involving children on the one hand and technology primarily ict which makes it possible to produce distribute and possess such material on the other hand . each of these elements varies considerably and the nature of perpetrators victims or material is not clear cut. the commercial child pornography circuit differs from the amateur circuit as far as perpetrators victims and material are concerned and the behaviours may vary as well. the issue surrounding adolescent or post adolescent vic tims is different to that involving pre adolescent victims and the perpetrators as well do not form a ho mogenous group. some individuals only view child abuse images whilst other users of such material also physically abuse children themselves. this variation has implications for the way in which it is tackled. if policy and implementation are to be successful they must reflect the diversity that exists in that area. sexual abuse in the digital and analogue worlds at present child abuse material actually takes the form of digital material. technological developments rapidly succeed one another and will almost always influence the phenomenon of child pornography. what is more online aspects increasingly feature in other forms of sexual violence against children. perpetrators and potential perpetrators as well as victims use ict intensively. whilst perpetrators fre quently use ict in the production distribution and possession of child abuse material underage victims can also be found in cyberspace. the offline and online worlds often converge into one as far as they are concerned and this means that both worlds must be taken into account in legislation policy and implementation. technological empirical and legal expertise and associated means must be sufficient to keep pace with the recent developments in the digital domain. ict sometimes presents a challenge yet it can also provide a means of preventing and tackling child pornography. time and space the issue of child pornography exists at various levels. it is not bound by time or space. individuals have produced and viewed child abuse images since visual technology photography came into existence and with the techniques that exist today it is likely that child abuse material even very old material will still be available for a very long time to come. space is hardly a factor at all in the past individuals who sexually abuse children and other perpetrators have always been able to find their victims. however ict has added a new dimension to the phenomenon namely cyberspace which enables perpetrators victims and material to come directly into contact with one another anywhere and at any time. it is important that continuity is achieved in tackling child pornography and in this regard it is highly likely that a similar issue exists in other countries in relation to the strategy to tackle it. as far as efforts to pre vent and tackle child pornography in the netherlands are concerned it will sometimes be desirable to seek international cooperation but this also means that we can examine whether experiences in other countries can be of benefit to the strategy to tackle the issue in the netherlands. extent of the phenomenon of child pornography the extent of the phenomenon of child pornography perpetrators victims and material is unknown. as far as the number of perpetrators and the quantity of child abuse material are concerned it may be child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur argued that the extent of the problem is increasing and that it cannot be tackled by criminal law alone. this means that we must seek a strategy to tackle child pornography both within and beyond the crimi nal justice process. it is not known what proportion of minor victims of sexual abuse are also victims of child abuse material nor can any judgments be made with regard to the numbers of minors who are victims of phenomena such as sexting and contact made online for a sexual purpose grooming . it is therefore necessary to investigate these areas in the netherlands in order to develop evidence based policy and implementation. relationship between child pornography and sexual violence child pornography is closely associated with other forms of sexual abuse or sexual violence against children that is perpetrated in both analogue and digital worlds. the legal framework has been useful in defining the area of investigation article b of the dutch criminal code defines child pornography itself but it is not the only perspective that can be used to address the subject. if strategies to tackle child pornography and to protect children from all forms of sexual violence are to be effective these must be interlinked with regard to policy and implementation. in the next two chapters we will explain the extent to which this is the case. the government agenda . introduction chapter states that when material constituting child pornography is discovered it usually means that sexual violence against children is taking place or has taken place child abuse material is more than simply information constituting a criminal offence. the criminalisation of child pornography has its foundations in the protection of children from sexual abuse. children need to be protected by putting an end to the abuse and by providing assistance. although child abuse material is primarily of a digital nature the offenders and victims exist in both the offline and online worlds meaning that the phenomenon of child pornography has both analogue and digital components relating to a sexual offence. this chapter will focus on the policy initiatives that are intended to protect children from sexual violence as well as upon the policy strategy for dealing with child pornography. what is relevant here is the question as to what extent the digital component and the aspect child pornography play a role in or is integrated into the policy for combating sexual violence against children. international developments and events in other countries and the extent to which these have influenced develop ments in terms of policy in the netherlands will be discussed. this chapter begins with an overview of policy developments in the netherlands in the areas mentioned above and provides an insight into the measures that have been taken over the past decades which in part form the foundations for the current policy. a number of relevant programmes that have since come to an end some of these were concluded some time ago now could still serve as inspiration for the policy that is to be developed today. following a description of the developments that have taken place since the early s the current policy agenda will be explained and the activities that the various ministries are currently develop ing individually or jointly in a number of combinations will be examined in detail. the main idea behind this is that the task of tackling child pornography needs to be carried out from the perspective that children need to be protected from sexual violence. this not only comprises a task for the ministry of security and justice in terms of combating child pornography but also for other government bodies in terms of protecting children. policy with regard to measures for tackling child pornography needs to form an integrated component of the policy with regard to measures for combating sexual violence against children. this does not therefore merely involve repressive measures to tackle the production distribution and possession of child abuse material but it also encompasses preventive measures. for example policy that is directed towards the safe use of the internet by children may also be able to have an indirect effect on preventing the production of child abuse images. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . policy developments since the early s this section will describe developments to policy instigated by various government bodies which have been directed towards combating child pornography and sexual violence against children. other committees and working groups often appointed by a ministry as well as international conferences and agreements have also played a role in the development of policy. a government wide initiative the naps was intended to expand the existing measures directed towards tackling sexual violence against children but ended prematurely after a lengthy introductory period. this section starts with the situation in the mid s a period in which debate about child pornography first arose. in july the amsterdam police force raided sex shops and seized any child abuse material that was present. in november hearings related to child pornography were held in the united states by the senate permanent subcommittee on investigations chaired by senator roth. in these hearings the netherlands was accused of contributing to the production of child abuse material and for that reason the topic became a cause of discussion. in the early s the development of child pornography legisla tion was also beginning to take shape. the commotion surrounding child pornography was not the only relevant aspect. in the so called kijkduin conference on sexual violence against women and girls took place and this marked the start of government interventions in the area of sexual violence against children. the government began to take responsibility. the first policy document on sexual violence against wom en and girls was published in . from that time onwards the issue of sexual violence began to be incorporated one step at a time into government policy and it was not only the directorate for the co ordination of emancipation policy of the ministry of social affairs and employment that was involved with this matter the ministry of justice and the ministry of health welfare and sport the ministry of health welfare and culture at the time also became involved . since then the topic has remained part of the government s agenda although this has of course been accompanied with ups and downs and a variety of viewpoints in terms of vision and approach that existed between the various ministries. as will become apparent the approach employed for tackling child pornography was predominantly repressive and predominantly a matter for the co operating organisations within the judicial domain. child pornography working group in june partly as a result of the comments from the united states the minister of justice at the time appointed a child pornography working group under the leadership of the public prosecutor de wit. the working group was assigned the task of cataloguing information about child pornography in the national action plan for combating sexual abuse of children naps ended in see further on in this section. prior to separate legislation on child pornography did not exist and this is partly the reason why action was hardly ever taken to combat it. van koppen . see parliamentary papers ii no. and parliamentary papers ii no. amongst others see also . . first box text developments in legislative history. stichting ambulante fiom rutgers nisso groep transact . parliamentary papers ii no. . stichting ambulante fiom rutgers nisso groep transact . r mkens . the government agenda the netherlands detecting any channels of distribution within the netherlands and investigating the origins and destination of child abuse material that had been identified. in its investigation report of august the working group concluded amongst other things that there was no indication of the existence of the production of child pornography in so far as the abuse of children with the intention of producing child abuse images on a commercial scale was concerned. child abuse material was only discovered sporadically. the final conclusion drawn by the working group was that their findings did not warrant a comprehensive more detailed investigation into child pornography being carried out. however the working group did make a number of recommendations with regard to effectively detecting and collecting material evidence including the recommendation that the policy for detection and prosecu tion should be uniform throughout the netherlands. the recommendation that the police should con sider the possible existence of child abuse material when they encounter cases involving the sexual abuse of children and that the searching of premises should be considered at the earliest stage possible was particularly interesting. the policy for detection and prosecution should be based on these starting points. the committee s conclusions that the production of child abuse material did not take place or hardly ever took place and the information that these conclusions had been adopted by the government were hardly based on fact. in the s and the early s the foundations had been laid for the continued existence of the distribution production and possession of child abuse material. this subculture did not disappear overnight see . . . nevertheless the content of the report constituted sufficient reason for the national government to take limited measures to combat the distribution production and posses sion of child abuse material. the period from onwards from onwards there was no clear indication of the number of cases of child pornography. the min ister of justice indicated that the national criminal intelligence service centrale recherche informatiedienst did not have a comprehensive national overview of the number of child pornography cases in . the number of cases that came to light was very low. those cases that were known did not have a background that was directly commercial. no investigations were carried out into the production distribution and possession of child abuse material investigative authorities usually became aware of the presence or distribution of images constituting child pornography following a report of sexual abuse with minors. in this involved cases for example. in that year the national criminal intelligence service was approached by the police five times for assistance in the identification of material constituting child pornography that had been discovered. van koppen . see also the discussion about this in the house of representatives parliamentary papers ii questions received december . de wit . parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . this parliamentary paper refers to the dutch government gazette . ultimately this recommendation was not included in the current implementation provisions concern ing sexual offences. parliamentary papers ii chapter vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur from a change took place with regard to how child pornography was viewed. the house of representatives called for adequate action to be taken. the approach at that time was mainly based on criminal provisions other than the article against child pornography because the law made the neces sary coercive measures possible for those offences which were not permitted by virtue of article b of the dutch criminal code. furthermore detection and prosecution was and is particularly labour intensive which was not proportionate to the low sentence carried by the offence at the time namely a custodial sentence of three months. detection was therefore assigned a low priority. article b of the dutch criminal code was amended in the custodial sentence carried by the offence was increased from a period of three months to four years. furthermore in order to be able to combat the commercial trade in child abuse material more effectively the article was supplemented by a clause regarding the penalization of individuals who make a habit or profession of committing the criminal offences. in ad dition to this a step was taken towards making the simple possession of child abuse material a criminal offence. up until then this had not constituted a criminal offence. in the meantime an increasing number of initiatives were being carried out in order to keep up with online developments. in the meldpunt kinderporno op internet hotline combating child pornography on the internet was launched. material constituting child pornography that had been discovered on line on a specific website or in a certain message could be reported by contacting the hotline. computer specialists were employed at the national criminal intelligence service and inter regional teams special ising in computer crime were also active in this field. links were then established with other specialists such as those specialising in cases concerning sexual offences who were employed as investigators at regional police forces. in the opinion of the minister of justice the responsibility for enforcing legisla tion relating to public decency on the internet should form part of ordinary criminal investigations. child pornography and child prostitution working group the first world congress against commercial sexual exploitation of children in stockholm sweden in september and the unrest surrounding the dutroux case in belgium in constituted reason for additional attention to be devoted to combating child pornography and the sexual exploitation of children. towards the end of two meetings took place resulting in the formation of the child pornography and child prostitution working group. the working group consisted of experts from the police judicial authorities institutions providing assistance and research institutions and it was apparent that it had a great deal of practical experience with the issue of child pornography and child de roos . an important consideration when increasing the sentence carried was the widening of the opportunity to apply coercive measures and special investigative powers. parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . see also second box text developments in legislative his tory . . . see . . . for further information about the meldpunt kinderporno op internet. parliamentary papers ii no. . child pornography and child prostitution in the netherlands working group . child right worldwide and transact were initiators of this working group and ultimately responsible for the content of the report kinderporno en kinderprostitutie in nederland. de stand van zaken child pornog raphy and child prostitution in the netherlands. the state of affairs which was published in . the ministry of justice supported the working group financially. the government agenda prostitution. according to the working group the problem was due to the fact that the various experts and parties that were involved in tackling child pornography and child prostitution worked in relative isolation. the working group presented a number of recommendations. its main recommendation was to achieve a coherent and effective approach to the issue of combating the sexual exploitation of children. further more it recommended that the expertise possessed by professionals in the matter of child pornography and child prostitution should be increased. the centralised recording see . of cases of sexual abuse was said to be necessary for successful detection. the police did not always investigate reports and in addi tion did not possess sufficient knowledge of the internet. convicted sex offenders in relation to possible future contacts with children should also be recorded. one of the conclusions drawn was that up until that point activities directed towards tackling child pornography and child prostitution could be described as incident driven. to ensure a coherent and effective approach to the issue of tackling child pornography the working group considered it important for the government to set up a policy document in due course. national action plan for combating sexual abuse of children on april the national action plan for combating sexual abuse of children naps was presented to the house of representatives. this plan had a lengthy start up period. it originally came into exist ence as a result of the united nations convention on the rights of the child that came into force in the netherlands in march . in this united nations convention all states that were parties undertook to take measures to protect children from all forms of physical or psychological abuse. secondly this ac tion plan elaborated on a number of agreements that were made in in stockholm at the previously mentioned first world congress against commercial sexual exploitation of children. the next step was the practical development of a national plan of action. for this purpose in the parliamentary standing committee on justice conducted a round table discussion with various organisations and institutions about the memorandum with regard to the approach towards tackling sexual violence and abuse. this discussion did not lead to manifest conclusions. in december child pornography and child prostitution in the netherlands working group . the working group had also developed a leaflet for anyone who for professional purposes was in volved with children and young people and suspected that a child had been made a victim of child pornography and or child prostitution parliamentary papers ii no. . see also parliamentary papers ii vi no. see . . . . parliamentary papers ii no. . this is not related to the previously mentioned child pornography and child prostitution in the neth erlands working group. ministry of justice . parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . however discussion did take place with regard to virtual child child abuse material the severity of the sentence the quantity of child abuse material present the difference between having a supply of child abuse material as opposed to possessing child abuse material the degree of familiarity with the phenomenon in society and the effect of material on behaviour. http en.wikipedia.org wiki united nations http en.wikipedia.org wiki united nations child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the minister for justice sent a letter to the house of representatives on the subject of the commer cial sexual exploitation of children and in spring approval was granted to present the integral document combating sexual abuse of and sexual violence against children to the house of repre sentatives. this document was intended to provide a boost to the various initiatives and to provide an overview of the state of affairs regarding the tackling of this issue and also served as an initiative for the national plan of action. one of the conclusions was that mutual co operation between the departments and between departments and non governmental and international organisations was necessary. one of the priorities of the naps was to prevent sexual abuse including child prostitution. within the scope of a chain oriented approach early identification would mean that abuse could be prevented from taking place or continuing to take place and that any further suffering on the part of the victims could be prevented. furthermore stimulating regional co operation was just one of the spearheads in the implementation of the naps. the final report of the national action plan for combating sexual abuse of children was reflected in the results that were achieved. amongst other things the national police services implemented a digital archive of material constituting child abuse material which included more than a million images . . . the amsterdam amstelland regional police force had developed the kids system identifica tion and tackling of child pornography couriers and child sex tourism by means of multi disciplinary cooperation at schiphol which made it possible to link images of perpetrators with victims. the police established a national co ordinator consultation group for the exchange of operational information which convened a few times each year. in april a brochure was published regarding the sexual abuse of children. this brochure produced jointly by the netherlands institute of social sexuological research and the ministry of justice was intended for parents and people who work with children. on december the website www.seksueelkindermisbruik.nl became operational. amongst other things the website was a digital knowledge centre for organisations that were actively involved in the efforts to tackle child pornography. in november the minister for justice at the time sent the final report of the naps to the house of representatives. although this marked the end of the naps the parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . ministry of justice . ministry of justice a. in addition to this the final report contains a number of proposals for a follow up including the es tablishment of an easily accessible public reporting centre for child abuse material within the police the creation of a national digital detection functionality for child abuse material which carries out surveillance and investigations on the internet on a structural basis and which is also involved in the preparation of projects for the purpose of detection investigations in the regions and the establish ment of a development team for special digital methods for detection. according the final report research was also carried out into the way in which the mutual collaboration between the forces can be made more intensive so that the necessary but very costly technical resources can be optimally employed. parliamentary papers ii no. . this website is no longer in use. http www.seksueelkindermisbruik.nl the government agenda minister stated that he would continue to devote attention to efforts to combat the sexual abuse of chil dren together with the state secretary of the ministry of health welfare and sport. the naps ended in december without an evaluation having taken place. the framework for cooperation that was created through the naps was no longer maintained after . joint provisions to tackle child pornography the policy plan of the dutch police force emphasised the need to improve the quality of the work carried out by the police including tackling child pornography and child prostitution in a more targeted manner. this led to a national initiative the joint provisions to tackle child pornography gvak intended to support the regional police forces and the district court public prosecu tor s offices. the gvak formed one of the first structural initiatives. this project ensured that the issue of tackling child pornography was included on the police agenda and fulfilled a driving function for example by getting supraregional police forces off the ground. a digital archive became operational perpetrators could be linked to victims via a computer system a national consultation was convened professional development was arranged in the form of courses and measures were put in place to in crease the level of expert knowledge amongst sex offence detectives. the programme also provided for the establishment of a child pornography coordination centre. one of the aims of this centre was to develop techniques for the detection of child abuse material on the internet. the activities of the gvak that ceased after july had in part become a component of the police forces and the national registration institute service. yokohama in december the second world congress against commercial sexual exploitation of children took place in yokohama. during this congress it became clear that despite the efforts made over the preced ing five years the number of children who had become victims of commercial sexual abuse over the world had increased. in a similar manner to the concerns stated in the investigation report child pornography on the internet in the netherlands worries were expressed with regard to the increasing extent of child abuse material on the internet. parliamentary papers ii no. . the final report concluded with the remark that continued attention needed to be devoted to the phenomenon of sexual abuse a message that was also made apparent in the second world congress against commercial sexual exploitation of children in yokohama referred to below. ecpat nl and dci also urged for a follow up to naps. source nrm p. . parliamentary papers ii no. . groeneveld . parliamentary papers ii no. . erents et al. . public order and safety inspectorate . parliamentary papers ii no. . profit for the world s children foundation . profit for the world s children is an ngo and pub lished the report child pornography and the internet in the netherlands of its own accord. the report was produced with assistance from experts and was presented to members of the house of representa tives and ecpat nl at the start of december . see . . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur meldpunt kinderporno government or no government the years between and were characterised by a discussion about the meldpunt kinderporno op internet the hotline combating child pornography on the internet . a parliamentary question was asked as to whether the responsibility for a hotline combating child pornography should not be borne by the government. the hotline launched in by internet service providers was and is a private foundation. in the ministers for justice and economic affairs announced that they were launch ing their own meldpunt cybercrime cyber crime reporting website alongside the hotline combating child pornography on the internet. this became operational in february . citizens could report child abuse material as well as terrorism to this hotline. the hotline combating child pornography on the internet also remained operational. by that time citizens had two hotlines at their disposal to which they could report. evaluation of the sexual offences legislation in an evaluation of the tightened sexual offences legislation was published this evaluation had been carried out on behalf of the ministry of justice. the evaluation report discussed the tightened sexual offences legislation in general. child pornography formed a part of this. evaluation of the sexual offences legislation in the amendments to the sexual offences legislation from were evaluated which led to the following findings. sentences for virtual child abuse material were hardly ever imposed doubts arose as to the legitimacy of the criminalisation of this practice and a lack of clarity emerged as to what exactly constituted virtual child pornography . cases involving victims whose apparent age was between and years were not being pursued. this led to the ques tion of whether this group was unprotected. ict developments led to problems for detection. digital methods of detection were necessary in order to supplement the traditional methods. the level of knowledge possessed by the police and the public prosecution service as well as the judiciary needed to be increased. the number of cases reported increased. the likelihood of prosecution and trial for offences that fell under article b of the dutch criminal code in creased. there were fewer decisions not to prosecute by reason of unlikelihood of conviction and fewer acquittals. a number of problems in terms of evidence such as the requirement that the victims must be apparently under sixteen years of age were solved by increasing the age. the general conclusion was that the revised child pornography stipulation had reduced problems in van koppen . question from member gerkens socialist party to the ministers for interior and kingdom relations and justice about a child pornography reporting centre. parliamentary papers ii appendix . see . . . for more information about the meldpunt kinderporno op internet. van koppen . see also . . . box text meldpunt kinderporno op internet compared with meldpunt cybercrime. l nnemann et al. . the investigation was carried out by the verwey jonker institute on behalf of the scientific research and documentation centre and the ministry of justice. the period of the investigation began in june and ended in march . l nnemann et al. . l nnemann et al. p. . l nnemann et al. p. . the government agenda terms of evidence. however this was not necessarily only due to the legislation the increased severity of the material the increase in the number of methods of detection the prioritisation of the implementation provisions concerning child pornography aanwijzing kinderpornografie and the changing social views could also have played a role. individuals who possess child abuse material were easier to detect than individuals who produce such material the latter group was hardly addressed despite being made a priority by the public prosecution service. the view ing of child abuse images without possessing images did not fall within the description of the offence. lanzarote convention in new legislation came into effect within the council of europe in strasbourg for the protection of children against sexual exploitation sexual abuse and child pornography. ratification of the final lanzarote convention led to a number of legislative amendments including those relating to the criminalisation of child pornography see . . for further details relating to the significance of this convention for policy see . below. rio de janeiro from to november the third world congress against commercial sexual exploitation of children took place in rio de janeiro. representatives from the ministry of foreign affairs including the ambassador for human rights and from the ministry of justice took part in this and the netherlands used this opportunity to present the preventive measures that it had taken both nationally and interna tionally in that area. the netherlands also emphasised the necessity for interdisciplinary and inter sector collaborations. the world congress resulted in the rio de janeiro pact against commercial exploitation of children. in addition to various ngos more than countries were involved in the realisation of the rio de janeiro pact. interim state of affairs the preceding brief outline of developments over the past decades illustrates the fact that the tackling of child pornography is almost entirely regarded as a task that falls within the remit of the police and the judicial authorities. these developments also illustrate the fact that the process of tackling this issue got off to a relatively slow start. various memoranda and policy texts concluded that co opera tion between the departments and between departments and non governmental and international organisations was necessary in addition to the establishment of a programme of measures involv ing a number of co operating organisations and the stimulation of regional co operation naps . in the coming chapters the extent to which this has been achieved will be indicated and we will discuss whether the responsibility for tackling child pornography is still primarily perceived as a responsibility of judicial partners alone. l nnemann et al. pp. . convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention october treaty series . report on human rights see also parliamentary papers ii v no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii appendix . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . the significance of the lanzarote convention the lanzarote convention was ratified on march and entered into force in the netherlands on july . the ministers for justice youth and families and foreign affairs signed the act to indicate that the protection of the child from sexual violence can not only be the responsibility of a single minis try. the explanatory memorandum opened with the sentence opgroeiende kinderen verdienen ons aller be scherming children who are growing up deserve to be protected by us all . according to the explanatory memorandum the convention aims to protect children from sexual abuse in broad terms and covers a large number of topics that relate to this protection. the material behaviours that constitute an offence are all stated within the scope of the same principles. therefore this means that the provisions relat ing to criminal offences and sanctions preventive and protective measures procedural stipulations intervention measures and measures that relate to co ordination and international co operation not only relate to sexual abuse as such but also apply to the issue of combating child pornography. article of the convention also obliges parties to bear responsibility for co ordination between the vari ous institutions that are responsible for preventing and combating the sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children. amongst others such co ordination lies within the responsibility of the ministry of justice and the programme ministry for youth and families. it will also become apparent from the chapters below that these ministries have also developed the greatest number of initiatives. the explanatory memorandum also lists a number of these initiatives such as the child abuse reporting and counselling centres and the action plan to tackle child abuse. nevertheless in order to achieve success in combating child abuse efforts are required on the part of all the authorities institutions and professionals involved as well as close co operation which also needs to extend to the tackling of child pornography. such co operation is necessary but a first step towards this involves creating awareness. not all minis tries feel a sense of responsibility for tackling child pornography for example. this becomes apparent from the response of the programme minister for youth and families at the time responsible for the raak reflection and action group to tackle child abuse to questions regarding child pornography from member of parliament verdonk. he writes that whenever people from a child s circle of family friends and professionals observe signs or suspect that a child is a victim of child pornography they can of course report this to the child abuse reporting and counselling centre whereby the stand ard course of action may then be pursued which may include the involvement of the child care and protection board and the police. he continues by stating that the task of tackling child pornography does however necessitate a specific programme of measures. due to the emphasis placed on detect treaty series . parliamentary papers ii no. p. . parliamentary papers ii no. p. . now the ministry of security and justice and the ministry of health welfare and sport. bnrm has investigated the digital antenna of the child abuse counselling and reporting centres see . . . see . . for a description of this action plan. parliamentary papers ii no. p. . ms. verdonk asked questions about combating child pornography and whether or not child pornog raphy is a form of child abuse. see . . . for identifying reports by the child abuse counselling and reporting centre. the government agenda ing individuals who produce trade in and consume often those who possess material constituting child pornography the task of tackling child pornography primarily falls under the responsibility of the minister of justice. holding a ministry responsible for the task of tackling child pornography is based on the assumption that an underlying market and networks of producers and consumers are involved in child pornography as opposed to sexual abuse within families. this is not true see . . from which it emerges that in many cases the production of child abuse material takes place within families or within dependency relationships. other ministries are also taking initiatives to develop policies aimed at combating and preventing child abuse combating and preventing sexual violence in dependency relationships promoting the ability to defend oneself against sexual approaches and promoting sexual health creating safe day care centres and increasing children s knowledge about digital safety. amongst other things this is usually based on immediately combating or preventing sexual violence against children. work is almost always carried out on an inter departmental basis. initiatives sometimes start out in the form of programmes imple mented by a single ministry and other departments join in at a later stage whereas other programmes are implemented on a government wide basis. one such initiative is the initiative of the ministry of justice with regard to domestic violence that later went on to form part of the governmental policy. the lanzarote convention specifically mentions sexual violence against children in which a digital component is involved. this was the first convention in which technological developments were taken into consideration in the legislation from the background of the general protection of children from sexual abuse. in the following chapters it will become apparent as to which policy initiatives have a digital or analogue component and the extent to which aspects relating to child pornography are taken into considera tion in this context. although the task of tackling child pornography needs to be integrated into the programme of measures towards combating sexual violence against children both for the sake of the effectiveness of the measures for combating sexual abuse as well as for the sake of the effectiveness of the measures for tackling child pornography it will come to light below that the connection between the digital and analogue aspects can barely be recognised in policy. . security and justice the ministry of security and justice is the initiator of and is specifically responsible for policy and meas ures for tackling child pornography. this is evident from various programmes such as the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography the korpsmonitor police corps monitor on child pornogra parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . for example the ministry of economic affairs is the initiator of the digivaardig digibewust campaign which takes place in collaboration with the ministry of security and justice and the ministry of the interior and kingdom relations see . ministry of justice b. the policy initiatives of the police are described below. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur phy and the policy implemented by the police with regard to combating child pornography overall see also . . the underlying principle is the enforcement of article b of the dutch criminal code. the measures initiated by the ministry of security and justice are primarily digital in nature. nevertheless the ministry also uses analogue measures to tackle sexual violence against children which have been implemented in the form of the domestic violence programme. . . security and justice the digital dimension over the past years the ministry of security and justice has implemented a variety of measures in order to combat child pornography. co operation between the ministry of security and justice the public prosecution service and the police on the one hand and the meldpunt kinderporno op internet hereafter hotline combating child pornography on the internet and ecpat nederland end child prostitution child pornography and the trafficking of children for sexual purposes on the internet on the other hand was intensified. increasingly use is being made of the knowledge and expertise of the above mentioned hotline as well as the knowledge and expertise of ecpat nederland for the formation of policy. in addition to this increasing levels of support are being provided to private institutions such as the hotline combating child pornography on the internet which in addition to information pro vides a forum where private individuals and companies can report child abuse material alongside the channels that already existed for this purpose within the police service. filtering and blocking the ministry of security and justice was also involved in supporting self regulation and public private sector partnerships see also . . the parties that were immediately involved predominantly the isps explored how an internet filtering of child pornography platform could be achieved. in the min ister of justice made arrangements with the main isps with regard to the filtering and blocking of child abuse material. they agreed that they would further extend the technical facilities to filter and block child pornography. on formation of the internet safety platform the isps the hotline combating child pornography on the internet and the government agreed to extend the tasks of the aforementioned hot line by producing a blacklist. the isps would use this blacklist for the purpose of filtering and blocking. arrangements were also made at a later date for the countries from which websites could be blocked. in the internet safety platform informed the minister that the blacklist that had been created was so small that blocking websites featuring child pornography would not be effective. the effort involved would not be relative to the anticipated effect. international consultations revealed that the provision of child abuse material on the internet had increased significantly. in autumn the company leaseweb launched a pilot with regard to the filtering of images of sexual abuse of children that were uploaded. in particular the aspects relating to security and operations were further explored. financial measures representatives from the ministry also entered into discussions with the dutch banking association nederlandse vereniging van banken nvb with regard to the possibility of exchanging information about the minister of justice progress on the issue of combating child pornography june . ministry of justice . minister of justice progress on the issue of combating child pornography june . minister of justice progress on the issue of combating child pornography december . parliamentary papers ii vi no. and parliamentary papers ii vi no. . the government agenda course of payment flows and the technology employed in this process surrounding the provision of ser vices on or via the internet in relation to child pornography. the nvb was willing to co operate in order to facilitate measures to tackle the exchange of child abuse material on the internet. in spring the european commission provided support to the initiative of the united kingdom and italy with regard to setting up a european financial coalition efc . the efc wanted to be fully operational as of september . from the report on the first phase of the efc it appears that private parties mainly financial institutions are willing to work together with the public organisations. various working groups have defined best practices that are necessary for concrete partnerships. progress reports in the plenary debate that took place in february the minister promised that he would provide a twice yearly report on how the endeavour to tackle child pornography was progressing. since then four letters have been written june december july and march . amongst other things the letters provided an overview of the number of pending cases. this number of pending cases see also . is liable to change. in june there were pending cases this number had risen to by september of the same year and had subsequently fallen to at the end of the year. the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings since october the netherlands has had a national rapporteur on child pornography. this moni toring role has been added to the mandate of the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings. the minister of justice at the time had assigned this role following recommendations from a number of different organisations. in the decree establishing the national rapporteur its field of investigation is described but in addition to this the decree emphasises that the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings is able to implement this field of investigation at its own discretion. task force to tackle child pornography and child sex tourism on november the task force to tackle child pornography and child sex tourism was established by the minister of justice. in addition to the ministry of security and justice the ministry of interior and kingdom relations the ministry of foreign affairs the police the national police services agency and the public prosecution services a number of isps are also involved in this task force. the aim of the task force is to reduce the production distribution and possession of material constituting child pornography and to combat child sex tourism. the task force analyses the problem areas with regard to the combating of child pornography in order to subsequently come up with solutions. the ministry of security and justice has sought co operation with various parties by involving them in the task force. although it is important for the police and judicial parties to promote public private sector partnerships the task force s agenda primarily appeared to be focusing on the aspect of detection in the combating of child pornography. minister of justice progress on the issue of tackling child pornography june . minister of justice progress on the issue of tackling child pornography december . minister of justice progress on the issue of tackling child pornography march . see also . . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . see introduction for details of the formation and the area of activity of the rapporteur. minister of justice progress on the issue of tackling child pornography july . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur programme of improvements in tackling child pornography further to the previously mentioned evaluation of the sexual offences legislation in the parlia mentary standing committee on justice of the house of representatives urged the minister of justice to establish organisational measures aimed at improving the measures to tackle child pornography. subsequently the police in consultation with the public prosecution service analysed the problem in more detail which resulted in the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography pvakp . by implementing the programme of improvements the ministry of justice strove to take the measures to tackle child pornography to the next level. this programme ran for two years entering into force in december . the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography concluded that the approach to this issue was not a dynamic one because it did not prioritise the measures adequately enough and because there was insufficient capacity available for the number of cases. what is more the programme pointed out that there was a one sided focus on individuals who possess child abuse material that insufficient co operation had been taking place between investigative bodies and that the investigative process appeared to lack effectiveness and efficiency. the programme of improvements in tackling child por nography also included a number of sub topics such as the development of innovative technological measures the development of a structural chain oriented programme including the implementation of a barrier model the professionalization of sex offence detectives the development of a national data base and research into the use of special investigative powers bijzondere opsporingsbevoegdheden bob . towards the end of the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography presented a plan to re launch a second phase. the first phase of the programme of improvements had set various measures in motion. the number of pending cases had remained constant amongst other things due to the inflow of cases from international investigations which could not be influenced. this was one of the reasons that the desired shift of focus in detection from those who possess child abuse material to those who produce it and the identification of victims had not fully succeeded in getting off the l nnemann et al. . national project on child pornography . the child pornography dossier formed part of the sexual offences portfolio at that time . this portfo lio had a portfolio holder within the board of chief commissioners who was supported by the sexual offences expert group. due to the co ordinating role that was assigned to the national police services agency with regard to the plan to tackle child pornography the deputy chief of the national police services agency was also involved in this initiative. the sexual offences portfolio holder and the chief of the national police services agency are both members of the investigative board. at the beginning of discussions were held by this board as well as the board of chief commissioners regarding the desired intensification of the efforts to tackle a number of phenomena. child pornography is just one of these phenomena and by putting forward this pilot proposal the portfolio holder wants to give content to more intensive efforts to tackle child pornography national project on child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . ministry of justice . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . ministry of justice . the government agenda ground and the available capacity for investigation was primarily being used to eliminate the number of pending cases. pvakp came to an end and the programme team proposed re launching the programme as pvakp . in march the minister for security and justice gave a positive decision on this proposal after which the re launch was implemented. however it emerged from the aims of the task force amongst other things that this alone would not be sufficient in order to bring about the desired shift in focus. the pub lic prosecution service and the police are drawing up a proposal for a national structure and direction in order to effectively tackle child pornography. the korpsmonitor the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography was assigned the task of monitoring the progress made amongst the regional police forces in the efforts to tackle child pornography. in a survey was carried out the korpsmonitor kinderporno police corps monitor on child pornography . this involved a baseline measurement. the conclusions formulated included the following the forma tion of structural supra regional co operation was promising the continually increasing number of pending cases was taking its toll on the capacity of almost all police forces to carry out digital investiga tions and it appeared to be effective to include digital investigators as staff in sex offence departments on a structural basis. a number of bottlenecks were also identified. first of all the organisation of efforts to combat child pornography within the police forces had become fragmented. in addition to this the police were faced with a constant flow of work. shifting the priority from tackling the simple possession of child abuse material to tackling its production had proved to be a complicated process. the korpsmonitor kinderporno indicated that the issue of tackling child pornography involves combating a wide ranging social problem that does not only concern judicial matters. the effectiveness of the work carried out by the police could be increased by involving more organisations in the efforts to tackle this offense. rotterdam rijnmond was provided as an example where work is carried in collaboration with the regional institute for outpatient mental healthcare the municipal health service social services the crisis centre probation and after care services women s shelters the support centre geweld achter de voordeur violence behind closed doors the salvation army young people s information point child care and protection agency child abuse counselling and reporting centres youth care agency vic tim support kinder en jongerenrechtswinkel legal advice centre for children and young people citizens advice bureaus prostitutie maatschappelijk werk social work for prostitutes jos s lawyers lawyers from juridische opvang slachtoffers seksueel geweld legal support for victims of sexual violence and the hotline combating child pornography on the internet . in the spring of the second korpsmonitor kinderporno police forces state of affairs was pub lished. one intention of the measures to tackle child pornography namely shifting the focus from parliamentary papers ii vi no. . see also . . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . see also . . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur individuals who possess child abuse material to individuals who produce such material had once again failed to be achieved. achieving this shift in focus was still presenting difficulties in many regions. in regions that placed a focus on the production of material the focus of investigations shifted to abuse. in other regions this was not the case partly as a result of a lack of capacity. the second monitor also stressed the importance of co operation with other partners in the chain. . . domestic violence up until this point initiatives have been described that are directed solely towards tackling child por nography and these have predominantly involved measures taking effect in the digital world. however the production of child abuse material usually also involves sexual violence against children. sexual violence may form a component of domestic violence a topic that also falls within the remit of the ministry of security and justice. the coming passages will devote attention to this topic which has a predominantly analogue perspective. domestic violence is violence that is committed by an individual from the family circle surrounding the victim. that circle may comprise partners and ex partners family members relatives and family friends. it involves various forms of violence such as assault and threats of violence but also stalking and sexual violence including forced sex forcing sexual acts to be performed and rape . the results of an investigation carried out by order of the ministry of justice in formed the basis for the plan to tackle domestic violence. from this investigation it emerged that of those inter viewed had at one stage been a victim of domestic violence that manifested itself on a weekly or daily basis. however the intensity of the violence seemed to be higher amongst women than men. in addition to this violence directed towards women took a sexual nature more often than the violence directed towards men. only of the victims had reported the violence to the police and in only half of these cases was a report eventually followed up by an investigation. in a national project to prevent and combat domestic violence voorkomen en bestrijden huiselijk geweld was launched which set out to form a link between policy frameworks. the approach that was chosen produced the following results amongst others. the organisations that were taking part in the project were encouraged to promote within their own ranks the measures to tackle domestic violence. a large national network also came into existence. the responsibility for tackling domestic violence was not limited to a single ministry. the minister for health welfare and sport had made domestic violence a topic of the collective prevention policy for health. the ministry of justice the ministry of health wel fare and sport and the ministry of education culture and science had also developed specific products themselves such as self defence training sessions brochures and the website for domestic violence. in the topic of domestic violence formed part of government policy by means of the government memorandum priv geweld publieke zaak private violence public matter . the memorandum dealt parliamentary papers ii no. . van dijk et al. . see also r mkens . ministry of justice b. ministry of justice b. ministry of justice b. the government agenda with the cooperative efforts to tackle domestic violence and described the ways in which domestic vio lence can be tackled in an integrated manner and in collaboration with the various disciplines in which tasks and responsibilities were clearly established for the public prosecution service and the police. all of this resulted in an increase in the number of intervention programmes an increase in publicity and the provision of information via the internet as well as more structural policy developments. in the period that followed various progress reports on the topic of domestic violence emerged. in bureau beke published the report binnen zonder kloppen omvang aard en achtergronden van huiselijk geweld in op basis van landelijke politiecijfers entry without knocking extent nature and background of do mestic violence in on the basis of national police statistics . this report also stated the number of children who had been victims and witnesses of domestic violence children under years of age had actually been victims of domestic violence themselves and one in ten children had witnessed domestic violence. within this group . of children had been a victim of sexual abuse. following an investigation into the links between cruelty to animals and domestic violence the task force huiselijk geweld en dierenmishandeling task force on domestic violence and cruelty to animals was established in . this task force intended to elaborate on the recommendations from the research and to stimulate new partnerships in order to create greater awareness of the topic. in january the minister of security and justice sent a letter to the house of representatives re garding the findings of an investigation into domestic violence and a response to the phenomenon. in almost percent of the cases of manifest domestic violence physical violence or sexual violence was involved. child abuse was not specifically included in the findings. the letter also referred to current developments within the framework of the measures to tackle child abuse which are specifi cally directed towards children as victims or witnesses of domestic violence. a possible connection with online sexual violence against children is not mentioned in this letter. . health welfare and sport the ministry of health welfare and sport now has a number of policy programmes that are in directly involved in tackling sexual violence against children. first of all the ministry employs the overarching topic of sexual health. amongst others this topic consists of programmes aimed at the prevention of sexual coercion. secondly the ministry is responsible for the regional plan to tackle child abuse. child abuse also covers sexual violence against children. the two analogue pillars will be singled out below. . . sexual health on november the state secretary for health welfare and sport sent a letter to the house on the topic of sexual health . amongst other things the letter contained a description of the actions the ministry was undertaking in terms of combating sexual violence towards children and contained in formation about sexual education preventing sexual coercion and protection for example with regard to victims of loverboys . r mkens . ferwerda . enders slegers janssen . parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the state secretary explicitly referred to problems surrounding sexual coercion eighteen percent of the girls and four percent of the boys had encountered some form of sexual abuse before their sixteenth birthday. there were still many young people who lacked sufficient knowledge about sexuality which signified to the ministry of health welfare and sport that these young people needed to be informed. children who are provided with information in a positive atmosphere are more able to defend them selves against sexual abuse. as is also laid out in the letter from the ministry of health welfare and sport schools also have a role to play in as far as sexual education is concerned. although schools do have some leeway within core objectives in order to devote attention to sexual education sexual and relationship education as such is not compulsory. the government is able to provide sufficient teaching packs and educational campaigns for young people. this letter does refer to the internet as a source of information for young people about sex and sexual behaviour but it does not refer to online sexual violence and possible measures to tackle this offense. as of the state secretary extended the safe sex campaign to include a campaign that was called sexual resiliency . the intention of this supplementary campaign was to ensure that young people were ready and competent in the matter of relationships and sexuality the promotion of sexual interaction competences in order to prevent problems such as sexual coercion and unwanted pregnancies with an additional focus upon the sexual education of boys. together with the minister for justice and the minister for youth and families the ministry of health welfare and sport formulated a coherent plan to combat sexual violence which was to prevent young people within voluntary organisations from becoming victims of sexual abuse or undesired behav iours. the ministry subsidised the project combating sexual intimidation of the noc nsf netherlands olympic committee netherlands sports federation specifically in so far as application of the project to sport was concerned. this project envisaged a comprehensive system for the prevention and tackling of sexual intimidation in the field of sport. rutgers nisso group sti aids netherlands . see also . . . parliamentary papers ii no. . the safe sex campaign has been underway since . in a little flower and bee were chosen because at that time sex was still more of a taboo topic. in the slogan ik vrij veilig of ik vrij niet safe sex or no sex was launched. the knowledge centre soa aids nl soa seksueel overdraagbare aandoening or sexually transmitted infection sti named that as the first campaign in the mass media. campagne veilig vrijen viert vierde lustrum safe sex campaign celebrates its fourth anniversary trouw august . parliamentary papers ii no. . the public campaign kindermishandeling wat kan ik doen child abuse what can i do which was initi ated in by the ministry of youth and families and is currently being implemented by the min istry of health welfare and sport also exists. the campaign is directed towards recognising signs of child abuse including the sexual abuse of children for example by using the indication test that was launched on june site wijst op kindermishandeling site indicates child abuse spits june . in addition to this the campaign is directed towards undertaking action following identification in which regard contacting a child abuse counselling and reporting centre forms the most obvious step. see also . . . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . see also . . the government agenda the ministry of health welfare and sport also supported the national partnership to tackle sexual violence. this partnership was launched in january by movisie the rutgers nisso group and the fiom national organisation offering psychosocial help information and advice regarding intended or unintended or teenage pregnancy among other issues as partners in the field and as centres of expertise in order to work together to provide an impetus to the improvement in the prevention of and tackling of sexual violence. in autumn the ministry of health welfare and sport and the ministry of education culture and science provided an additional financial incentive for new partner ship activities. as previously described the ministry of health welfare and sport took the initiative together with the minister for justice and the minister for youth and families to lay down the reporting code domestic violence and child abuse in the form of legislation. in addition there must be an im mediate and safe shelter for all victims of violence in dependency relationships therefore also for victims of sexual violence. finally early quick and effective assistance must be available so that victims and perpetrators regardless of the nature of the violence are able to lead lives that are free of violence. recently the ministry of health welfare and sport together with the ministry of education culture and science invested in the sexual education of boys via the programme sexual health of young people of the zonmw nederlandse organisatie voor gezondheidsonderzoek en zorginnovatie netherlands organi sation for health research and development and the new campaign maak seks lekker duidelijk make sex perfectly clear . the ministry of health welfare and sport extended the financial support for the partnership to tackle sexual violence up until the end of . providing reception facilities and as sistance to girls who are victims or who risk becoming the victims of loverboys via the project asja ii carried out by the treatment and expertise centre fier frysl n were extended by one and a half years by the ministry of security and the ministry of health welfare and sport. . . regional plan to tackle child abuse combating child abuse was one of the priorities of the ministry of youth and families at the time. in june the minister for youth and families sent a plan of action to the house of representatives partly on behalf of the minister of justice concerning measures to combat child abuse entitled kinderen veilig thuis children safe at home . this plan of action comprised four main aims namely preventing parents from abusing their children identifying cases of child abuse putting a stop to child abuse and limiting the harmful consequences of child abuse. additional attention was devoted to improving identification and from a parliamentary letter parliamentary papers ii no. of june it appears that the reporting code has still not yet been laid down in law. parliamentary papers ii no. . zonmw de nederlandse organisatie voor gezondheidsonderzoek en zorginnovatie netherlands organisation for health research and innovation in care . parliamentary papers ii xvi no. . this action plan came into existence with the co operation of many parties and was primarily written for all partners involved in tackling child abuse. the definition of child abuse from the youth care act was employed in the action plan see also . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur co operation between the various co operating authorities. the plan of action stated that co operating organisations should not work consecutively to one another but rather in co operation with one another. in this plan municipalities were assigned a key role. as directors of the local policies for young people they are capable of determining how increased prevention the strengthening of the powers of families and the co operation between professionals can actually be achieved. by all municipalities must have a youth and family centre centrum voor jeugd en gezin cjd . the municipalities are working on realising this goal. the youth and family centres fulfil a key role in improving support to young people and families. the formation of the youth and family centres encourages co operation between the co operating organisations that are acting on behalf of young people. an initiative that links in with this was the introduction of a seamless regional plan to combat child abuse the regional plan to tackle child abuse. the regional plan to tackle child abuse primarily involves local policy as the name suggests. the ministry of health welfare and sport is the driving force behind this plan and the municipalities fulfil a key role. the regional plan is primarily analogue in nature. this approach is based on the initiative of the reflection and action group against child abuse reflectie en actiegroep aanpak kindermishandeling raak . the raak approach is directed towards co oper ation between professionals in thirty five central municipalities. the intention is that the measures embedded in this approach will encourage the authorities involved such as municipalities the youth care agency municipal health services and schools to work together more effectively. the focus upon establishing an integrated youth policy is certainly not new see for example parlia mentary papers ii xvi no. . in this context the state secretary for health welfare and sport highlighted the importance of an integrated youth policy. intensive consultations with the vari ous involved parties were carried out for this purpose. the state secretaries for health welfare and sport for justice for education culture and science and for the interior and kingdom relations were consulted with regard to the broad approach of the integrated youth policy. the ministry for youth and families . the ministry for youth and families . expressions in the field of raak may sometimes lead to confusion. raak primarily stands for reflectie en actiegroep aanpak kindermishandeling raak reflection and action group against child abuse . raak considers itself to be a group of representatives which on behalf of the child by means of political lobbying is responsible for improving the provision of assistance within society and the quality of education. the action group was established in january by prof. van dantzig amongst others. this is the group that in took the initiative to tackle child pornography through more effective and efficient deployment of existing institutions. the text originates from history of raak written information from a member of the board of raak february . the central municipalities implement policy and are financially responsible for their region. in the neth erlands the central municipalities are responsible for shelters for women and addicts. source regional plan to tackle child abuse website www.aanpakkindermishandeling.nl viewed may . in july the directors of central municipalities the provinces and the large town regions signed the declaration of action for the plan to tackle child abuse together with the minister for youth and families. directors of the central municipalities formulated the agreement that they would make arrangements regarding a regional and combined conclusive plan to tackle child abuse. these arrangements were formulated with municipalities in their region regional partners and their province s and metropolitan regions. http www.aanpakkindermishandeling.nl the government agenda the core element of this regional plan to tackle child abuse involved a co ordinated and integrated provision of proven effective working procedures and methodology for all stages within the care con tinuum namely from prevention to diagnosis and intervention in the event of suspicion or identifica tion of actual child abuse. the central municipalities were asked to make conclusive arrangements between local and regional partners with regard to combating child abuse. they were also requested to actively offer training and educational programmes to professionals. the central municipality formed the driving force behind the introduction of these measures partly by means of appointing a regional co ordinator. the municipalities formulated a regional plan of action and links with the province were sought. the regional plan of action comprised a protocol for all professionals. the netherlands youth institute nji provided a model protocol for this. the nji bridged the gap between the ministry and the central municipalities and provided via implementation advisors support to the regional co ordi nators. the nji not only supported the regions but it also published a variety of progress reports and impact evaluations. on behalf of the programme ministry for youth and families the institute also attended to the co ordination of the plan of action children safe at home. the state secretary for health welfare and sport recently presented the final report regional plan to tackle child abuse by the nji and the final report impact evaluation of the regional plan to tackle child abuse by the berenschot and verwey jonker institute to the house of representatives. a great deal has been achieved municipalities and institutions have started to make progress. within the re gions an ever increasing group of involved parties have formulated co operative agreements and have laid these down in regional action protocols and agreements. the report also states that up until that point the emphasis had been placed on organisational aspects as opposed to actual practice. the nji indicates that many regions have cited as outcome an improved integrated procedure to combat child abuse through cooperation among the youth and family centres the local care network and the use of measures to tackle domestic violence. the state secretary also reports that embedding the regional plan to tackle child abuse within the current developments and existing structures in the regions is a perma nent point of attention. at this point it is important to seek alignment with the development of youth and family centres and plans to tackle domestic violence. no attention is devoted to online sexual violence against children in the policy documents regarding the regional plan to tackle child abuse. . education culture and science in general education can fulfil a role in combating sexual violence against children. this could consist of projects that inform children of the dangers posed by the internet. the minister for education culture and science made euros available as a one off financial incentive to enhance the campaign the action programme kinderen veilig thuis children safe at home therefore acted as a stimulus for the regional plan to tackle child pornography. the programme ministry had assigned the netherlands youth institute the role of supporting the re gions in the implementation of the raak approach. parliamentary papers ii no. . attempts were also made to ensure that this relates to developments with regard to the impending reporting code for domestic violence and child abuse. berenschot verwey jonkey institute . parliamentary papers ii no. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur called sexual resiliency with respect to how to use media wisely gender and culture aspects aspects re lated to sexual information and resilience for boys projects aimed at schools and parenting support. sexual resiliency in all its aspects was one of the topics that were addressed in information packages for teachers leaflets and other initiatives that were financed by the ministry. schools play an important role in the early identification of concerns surrounding the development of children. for this reason the minister for education culture and science prepared the legislative proposal zorg in en om school care in and around school . according to the minister this draft legis lation would legally guarantee co operation between education and the co operating organisations in the area of youth for example in care and advice teams as well as the task of the school in the field of early identification. the minister of justice also mentioned his intention to lay down the reporting code domestic violence and child abuse in the form of legislation together with the minister of health welfare and sport and the minister for youth and families. the ministry of education culture and science does appreciate the digital component of sexual violence against children particularly when it involves programmes such as how to use media wisely. . social affairs and employment subsequent to the amsterdam sexual abuse case the municipal authorities of amsterdam appointed a committee the gunning committee named after its chairperson see . . . the committee conducted an independent investigation into the question as to what lessons can be learnt from the amsterdam sexual abuse case. in accordance with its assignment brief the investigation was limited to the situation in day care centres. the reason for the additional attention for day care centres was based on the fact that the main suspect in the amsterdam sexual abuse case worked at a day care centre. the minister of social affairs and employment and the minister of security and justice elaborate on the recommendations of the gunning committee. in the letter of july they announced a number of measures including the continuous screening of employees in the area of childcare. if a report of a relevant criminal offence such parliamentary papers ii no. . this letter also states that the minister for health welfare and sport extended the safe sex campaign to include a campaign on sexual resiliency. a sum of euros a year was made available for this campaign. the intention of this supplementary campaign was to ensure that young people were ready and competent in the matter of relationships and sexuality the promotion of sexual interaction competences in order to prevent problems such as sexual coercion and unwanted pregnancies. there is currently a recommendation of the council of state but considering that it is possibly superflu ous taking the legislative proposal appropriate education into consideration the decision has been made to wait before proceeding with the legislative procedure. the influence of the original legislative proposal care in and around school can be found in the legislative proposal appropriate education at two points namely where it concerns the role of the municipalities in the care plan and the role of other youth care providers verbal information ministry of education culture and science august . parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. . the suspect did work at day care centres but these are not the cause of sexual abuse of children. for this reason devoting additional attention to day centres is arbitrary. parliamentary papers ii vi no. . the government agenda as child abuse arrives at the criminal records system of the ministry of security and justice the employer is informed of this. in future judicial data needs to be retrieved from european member states in order to prevent people who have been convicted of a sexual abuse offence elsewhere in europe from working with children again for example in the netherlands. an additional million euros were also set aside for supervision and enforcement in childcare. the vast majority of the recommendations from the gun ning committee were aimed at the childcare organisations themselves. that is where the responsibility for the safety and quality of childcare primarily lies. nevertheless many of the recommendations of the gunning committee are equally relevant for other sectors in which adults work with children. . economic affairs agriculture and innovation the ministry of economic affairs fulfils a role in combating and preventing sexual violence against children in a number of different ways. in particular this takes place in the area of the safe use of the internet by minors. the certificate in safe internet use diploma veilig internet dvi is a joint initiative of the ministry of economic affairs stichting kennisnet stichting ictopschool stichting de kinderconsument and stichting technika nederland. the parties signed an agreement and jointly developed a teaching pack specifically relating to safe internet use. in the ministry of economic affairs launched the digibewust campaign in collaboration with ministry of justice and the ministry of the interior and kingdom relations in order to increase aware ness of the risks that exist in the digital realm and to encourage the safe use of the internet. in this cam paign was re launched and given the name digivaardig en digibewust. digitally skilled and digitally aware at the end of the platform for internet safety mentioned previously in this chapter was launched. this platform is a collaboration between the government represented by the ministry for economic affairs and the ministry for security and justice and partners from the private sector. in the plat form worked on organising the efforts to tackle the distribution of child abuse material on the internet amongst other things. the notice and take down code of conduct was also one of the measures that were introduced. this prescribes how private partners and businesses in the online sector deal with a report of unlawful content on the internet such as child abuse images. since may the ministry for economic affairs has been directing the national infrastructure for tackling cybercrime nationale in frastructuur ter bestrijding van cybercrime nicc . the intention of the nicc programme is to develop a single integrated programme of measures to promote ways of working safely in the digital sphere in the public on june the member states of the european union came to an agreement with regard to the text of the eu directive for the combating of child pornography sexual exploitation of children and child pornography. the netherlands has attempted to make it possible for data exchange with regard to sexual abuse offences in other countries to take place as a matter of course. certificate of good conduct developments ministry for security and justice press release july see also . . the directive is not yet in force see . . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . it is notable that little attention has been devoted to the child pornography aspect of the sexual abuse committed by robert m. parliamentary papers ii no. . ecp epn annual report . ecp epn annual report . notice and take down code of conduct . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur and private sectors or a single and conclusive national infrastructure to combat cybercrime including child pornography. the ministry for economic affairs agriculture and innovation is also indirectly involved in addressing the digital aspects of sexual violence against children. . conclusion broad and narrow frameworks various frameworks currently exist that are in directly aimed at combating sexual violence in the context of which the production of child abuse material is able to take place. frameworks have been put in place that explicitly combat child pornography such as the police and judicial authorities narrow framework . frameworks also exist that may be able to implicitly combat the production of child abuse images for example programmes such as domestic violence and the regional plan to tackle child abuse broad framework . however differences can also be detected within these broad frameworks. the do mestic violence framework is based on bringing organisations together on the basis of cohesion in terms of content and may therefore prevent potential compartmentalisation. in contrast to this the regional plan to tackle child abuse is a territorial arrangement which sets out to achieve horizontal interlinking within the region and in which central municipalities form the bridge to the national government. digital and analogue frameworks the measures for tackling child pornography are based on narrow judicial grounds. however the com bating of child pornography is being implemented extensively partly by means of programmes such as domestic violence sexual health programmes for schools the regional plan to tackle child abuse and the prevention of sexual violence against children in day care centres which fall in part under the responsibility of the ministry of social affairs and employment. elements of the issue of tackling child pornography the digital aspects of sexual violence against children the digital environment of those who produce and possess child abuse material and the online worlds of perpetrators and victims are barely integrated into the programmes aimed at combating sexual violence against children. combining programmes that combat sexual violence with the judicial approach towards tackling child pornography may serve to increase effectiveness. within frameworks such as domestic violence and the regional plan to tackle child abuse parties co operate intensively but for the time being hardly any connections have been made with the efforts measures to tackle child pornography. connections until the measures to tackle child pornography have been integrated into the wide ranging approach regard ing the combating of sexual violence against children co ordinated efforts in combating the sexual abuse of children as referred to in the lanzarote convention cannot essentially be achieved. until a connection is formed between the analogue and digital worlds a difference which is very vague for children and one in which the dividing line between online and offline sexual violence becomes blurred caveats need to be added with regard to the extent of the protection of children. children need to be the focus of attention in both the real world and the digital world and for these children those two worlds form one single world. nicc . see . . . see table . . implementation . introduction in chapter we described the variation that exists amongst perpetrators victims and technology in rela tion to the phenomenon of child pornography. the picture that this creates is therefore a multi faceted one. that diversity within the phenomenon must be reflected in policy and implementation. however the fact that child pornography is closely associated with and sometimes forms part of other types of sexual violence against children also has implications for policy and implementation. although child abuse material exists primarily in digital format perpetrators and victims exist in both the offline and online worlds and consequently the phenomenon of child pornography has both an analogue and a digital element. the previous chapter provided an overview of the government s policy agenda over the past decades which sought to create cohesion between the strategy to tackle child pornography specifically based upon article b of the dutch criminal code as it currently stands and the policy that aims to protect children from sexual violence whether or not as a form of child abuse. in terms of policy the strategy to tackle child pornography is based upon a narrow legal framework whilst the efforts to tackle sexual violence are implemented on a broader scale. however elements of the strategy to tackle child por nography the digital aspects of sexual violence against children the digital environment used by the producer and possessor of such material and the online world of both perpetrators and victims hardly ever form an integral part of the programmes that aim to tackle sexual violence against children. yet it is imperative that every effort is made to achieve cohesion and coordination between the different programmes and that the digital element is also included if an effective policy in relation to children s sexual safety is to be achieved. as far as protecting children from sexual violence is concerned the focus upon the digital element also forms one of the cornerstones of the lanzarote convention. this convention is comprehensive and multi disciplinary in nature. in addition to criminal provisions and provisions imposing sanctions it incorporates preventative and protective measures as well as measures that ensure national coordina tion and international cooperation. the added value primarily lies in the fact that in ensuring the the adoption of this convention was reason for the netherlands to adapt its public decency leg islation whereby digital aspects concerning the protection of children s sexual integrity played a relevant role see . with regard to article b of the dutch criminal code corruption and grooming . article of the lanzarote convention. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur protection of children from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse through the enforcement of criminal law the convention takes into consideration the progressive digitalisation of society and the develop ment of technology. the express aim of the convention is to protect children from the negative effects of such technologies such as new forms of abuse that can occur in the digital world. by virtue of this convention it is clear that an integrated approach to tackling sexual violence against children one which includes the digital aspects is what is required. the landelijke expertgroep digikids digikids national expert group of the dutch police provides a role for the juvenile police in cyberspace and applies three pre conditions in this regard namely police awareness and communication towards young people digital awareness online availability of the police in order to carry out its core duties digital accessibility and the competence of the police to actually be able to carry out these duties digital competence . other organisations in sectors such as youth care services could also apply these pre conditions relating to the digital world in their contact with children. the present chapter will describe the implementation of the strategy to tackle child pornography viewed partly in the broader context of protecting children from sexual violence. as far as the implementation itself is concerned it is possible to distinguish between a number of processes which will be described below. the order in which these processes will be described corresponds with the findings from chapter . it is after all in chapter that the various stages of becoming a perpetrator or victim and the modus operandi to produce and obtain material are discussed. the processes that form part of the strategy to tackle child pornography can be identified in each stage of becoming a perpetrator or victim. for ex ample primary and secondary prevention projects focus upon preventing individuals from becoming perpetrators or victims and preventing material from being produced even before criminal acts have been committed . . whenever preparatory activities are identified any acts by perpetrators victimi sation of children and related material must be reported to the relevant authorities . . we will then go on to describe the repressive approach detection . prosecution and trial . and after care for and monitoring of perpetrators and focus upon the convicted sex offenders . . after care and monitoring are not only in place to serve the perpetrator him herself but also aim to uphold the safety of society and to prevent others from becoming victims. the aspects relating to child pornography are explained in the most detail in the sections in which we describe the repressive process. this comes as no surprise as the action taken by the police the public prosecution service the judiciary and in part the probation and after care service is per definition based upon article b of the dutch criminal code. in . we will discuss the support provided to victims. this process involves providing care for victims of child pornography. this consists of support for minors experiencing the consequences of sexual abuse and of the forms of online sexual violence including the distribution possession and viewing of images in which they feature. execution of the convention of the council of europe on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of october treaty series parliamentary papers ii no. subsidy application for the action plan towards a digital competence in the police force in their role to protect youth expertgroep digikids august not publicly available . for a description of how they operate see . . . . implementation the lanzarote convention the lanzarote convention contains an instruction in relation to practically all of the processes described in the subsequent sections. in this regard the convention applies a number of principles that apply equally to all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse stated in the convention including child pornography. with regard to the treatment of victims this means that a victim must be prevented from revictimisation. this is particularly relevant in relation to issues such as the protection of the victim s identity when child pornography is reported . . each party shall adopt a protective approach towards victims ensuring that the investigations and criminal proceedings do not aggravate the trauma experienced by the child and that the criminal justice response is followed by assistance where appropriate. most paragraphs will therefore make reference to the articles and principles of the convention. we will also examine the extent to which cohesion exists between these different processes. as pre viously stated child pornography must be viewed in the broader context of sexual violence against children. for that reason the processes will also be viewed within this broader context where necessary. this chapter will therefore not only examine specific interventions in relation to child pornography but also the extent to which any abusive context is taken into account in the current forms of intervention in relation to sexual violence against children. as far as certain elements are concerned it is not always easy to distinguish between cases that involve child pornography and those that do not within the broad context of sexual violence against children. by its very nature child pornography exists is an international phenomenon. it is therefore essential to seek international cooperation to tackle this issue. we will focus upon this international aspect in the section on detection and also provide recommendations with regard to making specific agreements. similar issues also exist in other countries. in this chapter examples from other countries will be exam ined in greater detail and the relevance of those examples to actual practices being implemented in the netherlands will be explained. finally we will also devote special attention to public private sector partnerships which play an es sential role in tackling child pornography . . this section will describe the initiatives that have al ready proved successful in this area and the ideas on how the partnership could develop further. a large proportion of child abuse material exists on the internet which is primarily the domain of the private sector. article of the lanzarote convention. see also article of the convention each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to protect the rights and interests of victims including their special needs as witnesses at all stages of investigations and criminal proceedings in particular by c enabling them in a manner consistent with the procedural rules of internal law to be heard to supply evidence and to choose the means of having their views needs and concerns presented directly or through an intermediary and considered and e protecting their privacy their identity and their image and by taking measures in accordance with internal law to prevent the public dissemination of any information that could lead to their identification . see also . . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . prevention . . introduction the prevention of child pornography is evidently closely related to the prevention of sexual abuse of chil dren. after all material constituting child pornography cannot be produced without the sexual abuse of children having taken place. the present sub section will look at the aspect of prevention. although the prevention of sexual abuse of children will also be discussed the prevention of child pornography will form the focus of this discussion. there seems to be no doubt about the most important aim in the prevention of sexual abuse of children it is to prevent potential perpetrators from abusing a child in the first place. it would seem therefore that potential perpetrators and victims are the most obvious target groups when implementing measures to prevent the sexual abuse of children. however in view of the fact that the sexual abuse of children takes place within specific situational contexts and social ecosystems and is influenced by these factors the literature takes a broader approach as a basis for the prevention of this type of abuse. this approach gives rise to four target groups for the implementation of preventative measures perpetra tors victims situations and communities. smallbone et al. describe three prevention levels within each target group. primary prevention aims to prevent individuals from becoming perpetrators and victims by means of general information provision and the raising of awareness among these target groups as a whole. this type of preventive measure is geared towards each of the four target groups as a whole. by con trast secondary prevention is specifically concerned with those individuals groups and locations that pose a risk within the four target groups. in comparison with primary prevention secondary prevention has the advantage in theory that the measures are aimed at the individuals and situations who that require them. tertiary prevention is concerned with intervention measures for individuals groups and situations after sexual abuse has already taken place. this type of measure aims to prevent abuse from continuing or being repeated. tertiary prevention measures relate to early identification and the limitation of the harm done to victims. in view of the fact that the classification into three prevention levels is commonly used within the domain of criminology this classification will also form the starting point in the present re port albeit that this sub section will be limited to the discussion of the primary and secondary prevention levels within the four stated target groups. this section will therefore only be concerned with prevention measures in relation to individuals and situations where sexual abuse has not yet taken place. wherever tertiary prevention is primarily concerned with identification after care and monitoring measures that fall under this prevention level will be discussed in . and . . although quite a great deal of attention has see article of the convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series parliamentary papers ii no. p. . there are a number of exceptions to this for example sexual abuse is not always involved in virtual child pornography and sexting. see . and . . . this refers to prevention of child pornography in the broadest sense of the word preventing children from becoming victims of child pornography as well as preventing the production distribution pos session etc. of child abuse material. smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. chapter . smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . implementation been paid to the prevention of sexual abuse of children the extent to which many preventative measures actually prevent such abuse is not known. the greatest challenge with regard to prevention of sexual abuse of children seems to lie in the way knowledge and expertise are translated into a policy of evidence based prevention. in the present sub section we will discuss a number of prevention measures geared towards both the real and virtual worlds with regard to each of the four prevention target groups namely perpetra tors victims situations and communities. although it goes without saying that these prevention measures are broader in scope than the prevention of child pornography in most cases they aim to prevent the sexual abuse of children and child pornography may form an element in such a situation. in particular we will examine the proven preventative effect of the preventative measures to be discussed. . . prevention measures aimed at perpetrators the criminalisation of child abuse and child pornography is a form of primary prevention that affects perpetrators. however the preventative effect of the increase in the maximum sentences has not been demonstrated. after all as far as many potential perpetrators are concerned the immediate prospect of gratification is far more compelling than the distant and indefinite risk of being subject to sanctions under criminal law. moreover experienced child abuse material collectors believe they are unassailable judge the likelihood of arrest as low and have a low opinion of the calibre of investigative authorities. many preventative measures are focused on tertiary prevention with regard to perpetrators such measures in clude prosecution punishment and the prevention of recidivism. the most important aim of this tertiary type of prevention is to prevent known perpetrators from being able to continue their activities or from re offending. interventions that aim to prevent recidivism are discussed in . . the focus of secondary prevention is placed upon individuals who are at higher risk of sexually abusing children but who have not yet committed such an offence. the problem with preventative measures aimed at perpetrators is that the focus upon convicted perpetrators seems to be at the expense of prevention with regard to individuals who are at higher risk of committing their first sexual offence against children but have not yet done so. in re sponse to parliamentary questions on this subject the minister for public health welfare sport cited a statement from the dutch association of psychologists nip which ascertained that the support that is cur rently available is primarily put into action when a paedophile has already committed an offence. support smallbone et al. p. finkelhor pp. interview with clemens hosman in movisie experts over ontwikkelingen en trends in seks en sexueel geweld experts on developments and trends in sex and sexual violence pp. . article of the lanzarote convention obliges parties to the convention to ensure that individuals who fear that they will commit one of the offences specified in the convention have access to intervention measures see the convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series parliamentary papers ii no. pp. see also . . . finkelhor pp. smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . jenkins pp. . see also . . . see . . for further information regarding perpetrators. prosecution and punishment are discussed in . . smallbone et al. p. finkelhor p. . parliamentary papers ii and parliamentary papers ii . see . . regarding the distinction between paedophilia and paedosexuality. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur can prevent a great deal of harm at an early stage both for the victims and the perpetrators explained the director of the nip. the minister for public health welfare sport stated in response to this that although expert care is available for paedophiles who do not receive this care in a forensic capacity it has proved very difficult in practice to ensure that this target group receives treatment due to the immense taboo that exists in rela tion to this disorder. although the current prevention measures in the netherlands are not yet geared towards these risk groups plans are in place to introduce three secondary prevention measures aimed at perpetrators in the netherlands. these potential measures will be discussed in the present sub section. helplines in the united kingdom and ireland adults who have concerns about their own or another individual s sexual thoughts or behaviour can consult the anonymous helpline by telephone and e mail of the stop it now organisation described in . . . for help and advice. almost a quarter of the clients of stop it now who call on their own behalf have not yet committed a sexual offence online or offline . tailored advice is provided to these clients which aims to prevent children from being sexually abused or online behaviour from getting out of control. the fact that of these potential abusers are not known to the authorities emphasises the importance of an anonymous helpline of this type for this risk group. the de waag forensic clinic and meldpunt kinderporno op internet hotline combating child pornography on the internet are planning to introduce the british concept in the netherlands in early . just as in great britain the aim of an anonymous helpline and therapy sessions must be to prevent potential perpetrators from committing an offence. preventing underage victims from becoming perpetrators perpetrators of child sexual abuse have in a number of cases been victims of abuse themselves in the past. for this reason support for children who have been sexually abused can play an important role in the secondary prevention of perpetrators. in the first progress report on tackling child pornography march the then minister of justice wrote that more time is needed in order to ascertain the extent to which prevention of the development of capacity to become a perpetrator is explicitly addressed in the treatment programmes for underage victims. see the nip website www.psynip.nl nieuwsberichten website hulpverlening aan pedofielen schiet te kort viewed august . parliamentary papers ii . for that matter it seems that no policy exists for reaching and treat ing individuals with a sexual preference for children who have not yet committed any abuse. twenty three percent of the adults who called on their own behalf in the period june to novem ber stated that they had not yet committed a sexual offence. of this group were concerned about their offline behaviour hands on sexual abuse of children whilst were concerned about their behaviour on the internet child pornography . stop it now helpline report . for a more detailed description see . . . stop it now p. . information supplied verbally by meldpunt kinderporno op internet march information supplied verbally by stop it now during a working visit march ministry of justice first progress report on the tackling of child pornography march preventatieve hulp voor potenti le pedoseksueel pre ventative help measures for potential paedosexuals algemeen dagblad june . smallbone et al. p. . the progress in tackling child pornography march . parliamentary papers ii . vi no. . http www.psynip.nl nieuwsberichten website hulpverlening aan pedofielen schiet te kort implementation certificate of good conduct individuals who wish to work with children are often required to submit a certificate of good conduct verklaring omtrent het gedrag vog and references. the gunning committee which conducted an in vestigation further to the amsterdam sexual abuse case found that new staff members are not being screened carefully enough. the committee identified opportunities in a number of areas to tighten this procedure for example by checking certificates and making it compulsory to verify references. the brancheorganisatie kinderopvang childcare sector organisation is currently drawing up a procedure that includes conditions that should be fulfilled in selecting a candidate. one of the conditions will be that enquiries must always be made with regard to references from previous employers placements or training courses. with regard to the certificate of good conduct the committee recommends that all staff must be asked to provide an updated certificate of good conduct every two years. however in their letter of july the minister for social affairs employment and the minister of justice indicated that the government prefers a form of screening whereby authorities continue to monitor employees in the childcare sector in order to ascertain whether a new relevant criminal offence has been entered in the criminal records system under the name of such an employee. at the time of writing this report the method and form of screening were still being investigated by the government in consultation with the childcare sector. the gunning committee also issued a recommendation to the minister of security and justice to investigate the possibilities for enabling bodies that issue certificates of good conduct to access information regarding convictions for criminal offences in other countries. on the basis of this recommendation the state secretary for security and justice has advocated joint efforts at a european level to improve the way in which information is shared. the agreement on the directive on combating sexual exploitation of children incorporates measures to ensure that information about convictions is also exchanged across borders. see also . . . article paragraph of the lanzarote convention requires that parties to the conven tion ensure that individuals who have been convicted of sexual abuse of children do not have access to professions that involve frequent contact with children see the convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series parliamentary papers ii no. pp. . from january the stichting beroepsbeoefenaren natuurlijke gezondheidszorg rbng foundation of natural health practitioners made a certificate of good conduct vog compulsory for all thera pists listed on its register. without that certificate therapists cannot be listed on the rbng register and healthcare insurers will not provide reimbursement for treatment. according to the director the amsterdam sexual abuse case concerning the children s day nursery het hofnarretje formed the im mediate reason for the measure source anp september . gunning et al. p. . gunning et al. p. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . gunning et al. p. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . gunning et al. p. . europees akkoord informatie uitwisseling seksueel kindermisbruik european agreement on exchange of informa tion concerning child sexual abuse www.rijksoverheid.nl june europees akkoord over informatie pleger zedenmisdrijf kinderen european agreement on information about perpetrators of child sex of fences blik op nieuws june . http www.rijksoverheid.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . . prevention measures aimed at victims the aim of primary and secondary prevention strategies is to minimise the risk that children will become victims of sexual abuse. the lanzarote convention obliges the parties to the convention to provide chil dren with information concerning the dangers of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse and in this way protect children and enable them to take defensive action. little is known about the efficacy of pre vention programmes for potential victims of sexual abuse however. although studies of the efficacy of prevention programmes usually show that children s knowledge and awareness have improved there is little proof that prevention programmes actually change children s behaviour. furthermore the social sciences community has expressed criticism of the fact that the responsibility for the prevention of sexual abuse is placed upon children. smallbone et al. have concluded that adults must ultimately bear responsibility for the safety of children. prevention measures aimed at parents of very young children one area for attention with regard to the prevention of sexual abuse of children concerns the target group of children aged years of age. this target group is too young for prevention programmes to be set up. however measures to prevent abuse in this vulnerable group of young children can be geared towards the parents instead of the potential victims. the gun ning committee which conducted an investigation of abuse at children s day nurseries made several recommendations to parents such as screening and making enquiries regarding refer ences from child minders using internet child minding services. in addition the commission recommended that educational materials should be developed for parents and that such material should amongst other things be geared towards preventing their child from becoming a victim of abuse. although the gunning committee focused exclusively upon children s day nurser ies many of the recommendations are also relevant to other sectors in which adults work with children. the purpose of most prevention programmes geared towards children is to teach them three aspects definitions of sexual abuse and the ability to recognise undesirable sexual behaviour strategies to avoid risky situations and to protect themselves against sexual advances of perpetrators the message that victims must confide in an adult in the event of inappropriate behaviour or sexual abuse. article of the convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series parliamentary papers ii no. p. . see studies such as finkelhor smallbone et al. quayle et al. kaufman et al. interview with clemens hosman in movisie p. . quayle et al. pp. smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. pp. . smallbone et al. p. . see also . . regarding very young victims of child pornography. see also simon zgoba p. . gunning et al. p. . gunning et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . implementation prevention in the real world an inventory of existing initiatives and projects concerning the protection of one s sexual integrity by the internationaal informatiecentrum en archief voor de vrouwenbeweging iiav now known as aletta institute for women s history and rutgers nisso groep revealed that a large and reasonably varied number of intervention programmes exist in the netherlands in relation to the protection of one s sexual integrity which programmes aim to serve the needs of the national regional or local population. the majority of interventions broadly focus upon defending one s integrity but what is striking is that almost none of the projects that were studied are explicitly geared towards prevention of sexual coercion and sexual violence. moreover it is not always clear whether the projects also expressly seek to change behaviour. the iiav and rutgers nisso groep therefore recommended that specific attention must be paid to protection of sexual integrity preferably with the aim of practising changes in behaviour. prevention in the virtual world in its annual report of meldpunt kinderporno op internet hotline combating child pornography on the internet reported an increasing trend in the number of children who rendered themselves victims for instance by producing and sending photographs or video files of a sexual nature by telephone or the internet. the centre also conducted a study of the chatroom behaviour of young people between the ages of and years. although the youngsters indicated that they were aware of the dangers of chatting to strangers of boys and of girls stated that they had once agreed to meet someone in real life with whom they had become acquainted on the internet. the fact that youngsters are aware of the dangers associated with chatting yet do not always act accordingly is consistent with the findings of other studies into the preventative effect of awareness campaigns which showed that there is little evidence that prevention programmes influence behaviour. it is obvious that prevention programmes geared towards protecting one s sexual integrity must also focus upon the online behaviour of children and young people. however only seven projects of the interven tion programmes that were studied by iiav and rutgers nisso groep focused on promoting media literacy. meulmeester et al. . for an overview of current policy programmes see . and later in this report. these concerned generic projects and interventions of which prevention of sexual coercion forms a substantial or identifiable component and specific interventions that are aimed at a specific target group or a specific element of sexual coercion. meulmeester et al. pp. . quayle et al. pp. and smallbone et al. p. draw the same conclusion with regard to prevention projects in other countries. meulmeester et al. p. . meldpunt kinderporno op internet p. . see also . . for further information in relation to the phenomenon of sexting. meldpunt kinderporno op internet . quayle et al. cite three studies that show that whilst knowledge has increased thanks to the prevention programmes in question young people s behaviour has not been influenced pp. . these concerned the websites www.mediawijsheidkaart.nl www.kinderconsument.nl the sub page veiligheid safety on www.kennisnet.nl www.surfsafe.nl www.iksurfveilig.nl viewed august and the educational pack online grooming of stichting k.o.e.i. children parenting education and internet foundation . http www.mediawijsheidkaart.nl http www.kinderconsument.nl http www.kennisnet.nl http www.surfsafe.nl http www.iksurfveilig.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur projects in the field of media literacy involve two areas of focus the raising of young people s awareness of sexualised images and making them more able to take defensive action against such material and the protection of sexual integrity the prevention of cybersex online dating and online grooming. three of these seven projects address the awareness of sexualised images. the report asks the question of whether more intervention programmes should focus upon the use of new media and the risks that they pose to young people. it is obvious that the answer to this question is yes. in view of the fact that the internet forms a significant part of the environment in which children and young people live it seems logical that prevention projects in relation to sexual violence should also expressly concern themselves with the dangers associated with online behaviour including child pornography. the police and the kindertelefoon chil dren s telephone service have taken the first steps to create a recognisable online profile and to provide information concerning internet safety amongst other initiatives . . . . other organisations that play a role in protecting children from sexual violence could also enter into collaborative partnerships with privately owned entities in order to be able to educate children. . . situational prevention the aim of situational prevention is to eliminate or reduce undesirable behaviour within certain situ ations by identifying and changing elements that encourage or allow misconduct. one of the most important reasons for abusing children as far as perpetrators are concerned is that they have the op portunity to do so. the purpose behind situational prevention is to remove or reduce this opportunity. in general sexual abuse of children takes place within three types of environments in the public space within an institutional context children s day nursery youth care and foster care facilities sport club and in the domestic setting. public spaces where children could potentially be abused include public toilets isolated areas shopping centres swimming pools parks playgrounds schools and amusement arcades. as far as child pornography is concerned however the internet is the most important public space where this offence can be committed. the internet is primarily the domain of the private sector for this reason a public private sector partnership is essential in order to prevent sexual abuse of children via the internet. language filters form one example of methods of situational prevention specifically aimed at the internet. these and other forms of online prevention often within a context of public private partnership will be explored further in . . in view of the fact that the circumstances within the institutional context are the most suitable for situational prevention measures we will examine this form of situational prevention in greater detail. meulmeester et al. p. . meulmeester et al. p. . meulmeester et al. p. . see . for the digivaardig en digibewust digital skills and digital awareness campaign. smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . see also . . regarding the distinction between preferential and situ ational offenders. smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . implementation situational prevention within an institutional context organisations that specifically target their activities at children are classed as organisations within an insti tutional context. examples of such organisations include sport clubs children s day nurseries schools and young offenders prisons. perpetrators within the institutional context are usually volunteers or staff mem bers of the organisation concerned. the toolkit in veilige handen toolkit in safe hands relating to prevention of sexual abuse of minors in the volunteer effort sector was developed by the association of dutch voluntary effort organisations vereniging nederlandse organisaties vrijwilligerswerk in conjunction with the social develop ment organisation movisie noc nsf dutch olympic committee dutch sport federation and scouting nederland. the toolkit contains a step plan for making organisations safe. many of the thirteen steps focus upon situation prevention measures such as introducing a code of conduct drawing up a risk analysis and creating a safe environment. the toolkit can be downloaded free of charge and features other tools such as a model code of conduct which explicitly makes reference to the criminalisation of child pornography. images amongst their other findings the gunning committee established that with respect to day nurseries there were far too many opportunities for adults to be alone with children. further to this considera tion the committee made a number of recommendations suitable for application within the institu tional context. for example it has proposed that day nurseries should draw up a code of conduct in which it is stipulated that photographs shall only be edited on and distributed from the computer at the day nursery via a secure internet application and that parents must provide written permission for photographs of their child to be used. however the committee does not advocate the systematic use of cameras in group rooms on the one hand because this will be less conducive to spontaneity with respect article of the lanzarote convention calls upon the parties to the convention to involve the private sector and civil society in the development and implementation of policy to tackle sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series parlia mentary papers no. p. . this also includes foster care. for further information regarding sexual abuse in youth care institutions and in foster care see the progress reports by the samson committee www.onderzoek seksueel kin dermisbruik.nl documenten viewed august . in its fourth public report the samson com mittee s findings included the following perpetrators of sexual abuse in the institutions are in most cases the professionals and in foster families they are the foster fathers. see samson fourth public report p. . smallbone et al. p. . see the website in veilige handen www.inveiligehanden.nl viewed july . see the website of vereniging nederlandse organisaties vrijwilligerswerk www.nov.nl nov docs in veilige handen in veilige handen bijlage inveiligehanden modelgedragscode medewerkers.pdf viewed july . gunning et al. p. . this conclusion relates to the day nurseries in question in amsterdam. how ever the recommendations of the gunning committee are aimed at the childcare sector as a whole the task of the committee of inquiry is to investigate all facts and circumstances in relation to the question of how the potential abuse of children was able to take place in the day nurseries concerned and via the internet child minding service s concerned. the investigation will also focus upon child care in general. gunning et al. p. . gunning et al. p. . http www.onderzoek seksueel kindermisbruik.nl documenten http www.inveiligehanden.nl http www.nov.nl nov docs in veilige handen in veilige handen bijlage inveiligehanden modelgedragscode medewerkers.pdf http www.nov.nl nov docs in veilige handen in veilige handen bijlage inveiligehanden modelgedragscode medewerkers.pdf child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur to how staff and children interact with one another and because a camera cannot cover every corner whilst on the other hand cameras could pose an additional risk if the images fall into the wrong hands. four eyes principle one of the recommendations made by gunning et al. concerns the tightening of the ratio of profession als to children. the committee observed that the presence of a single adult per group posed a significant risk to the safety of children. however in the current system it is possible for a few hours each day to deviate from the rule that two professionals work with a group. the specific recommendation is that there must be two adults at all times who have the children in a group within view or within earshot. means of reinforcing the four eyes principle further include the removal of structural obstacles for instance by fitting glass walls in group rooms. it should be noted in this regard that it is important to achieve an effective balance between the advantages of this type of preventative measures and the risk of arousing unfounded suspicion in relation to physical and emotional contact between adults and children. the gunning committee also recommended that a baby monitor is placed permanently in sleeping areas even if a staff member remains with the children. registration system at the end of june the dutch data protection authority agreed to a registration system for members of volunteer organisations who had been subject to sanctions for sexually inappropriate behaviour. the registration system enables organisations to prevent individuals from moving from one organisa tion to another if they are caught having committed sexual abuse. the registration forms an addition to the certificate of good conduct in view of the fact that the system reports all individuals against whom measures have been taken even if they have not committed any criminal offences. the gunning com mittee also examined the possibilities for a risk register but one specifically focused on day nurseries. details such as dismissal from a day nursery and complaints or reports that could be connected with sexual abuse could be included in such a register which therefore largely corresponds with the regis tration system for volunteer organisations. there are some disadvantages associated with a registration system or register however. for example the register may contain false positives whilst at the same time it offers no definite guarantee that every individual who poses a risk is listed in the register. despite these disadvantages the committee deemed the preventative effects of such a register to be significant enough after all to merit their recommendation for further investigation. gunning et al. p. . gunning et al. p. . see also smallbone et al. p. gallagher . gunning et al. p. . this is also known as the four eyes principle see pp. . see also smallbone et al. p. . gunning et al. p. . for further information regarding the registration system see the nov website www.nov.nl viewed july . see . . regarding the certificate of good conduct. participating organisations must have disciplinary regulations in place. for further information regard ing the disciplinary regulations for sport clubs and volunteer organisations see the nov website www. nov.nl def viewed july . see also smallbone et al. p. regarding the advantages of a register of this type. gunning et al. p. . http www.nov.nl http www.nov.nl def http www.nov.nl def implementation . . public prevention measures awareness raising campaigns and education are the most important forms of primary public prevention. evaluations of public awareness raising campaigns have shown that the target groups in question were al ready aware of the fact that sexual abuse poses a serious problem in society but that little was known about how to define and recognise the sexual abuse of children and what steps to take in order to reduce the risks of abuse. public campaigns that only serve to increase awareness of sexual abuse of children and child por nography are therefore insufficient smallbone et al. argue that the emphasis must be placed upon specify ing the nature of the problem and upon opportunities for parents to protect their child. if no attention is paid to these aspects in public campaigns there is the risk that the campaign may only increase the fear of abuse instead of achieving a preventative effect. a further area for attention is the fact that awareness raising campaigns are sometimes overshadowed by the public s exposure to media reports of severe cases of sexual abuse which focus upon the grave details of such abuse and result in the stereotyping of perpetrators. such reports can give rise to anxiety whilst the public is not given the means to protect itself from abuse. public health model in the literature the so called public health model is described as a framework for public preven tion. the basic principle is that sexual abuse of children is not the exclusive domain of the judicial authorities but it must be viewed within the broader context of public health. the emphasis in this approach is placed upon primary prevention whereby situational and behavioural risks are identified and whereby this information is used to inform the public and draw attention to these risks. such an approach from the context of public health is not yet used in the netherlands. for example the website of the ministry of public health welfare sport contains information on social issues such as abortion domestic violence and drugs and the ministry of education culture science features a web dossier on the emancipation of homosexuals on its website but there is no information concerning paedophilia on either of the websites. many misconceptions exist in relation to phenomena connected with sexual abuse such as child pornography and paedophilia. as a result of the public reactions to major abuse cases such as those surrounding the cases of robert m. and benno l. paedophiles can end up being forced into even greater isolation . the absence of useful article of the lanzarote convention obliges parties to the convention to run public campaigns in which information and advice is provided in relation to sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of chil dren lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series . the government implements this in the periodic public campaign within the scope of the action plan to tackle child abuse which targets the general public and is geared towards both children and people who live and work around children see . . . the information campaign digivaardig digibewust is also mentioned which specifically draws attention to the dangers that exist to children on the internet and in using other modern means of communication parliamentary papers ii no. p. see also . . smallbone et al. p. . for an overview of policy programmes see chapter . smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . see also . . for further information regarding perpetrators. smallbone et al. p. . center for sex offender management pp. . . kaufman et al. p. . broadcast by rtl nieuws january . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur information and the negative attitude of the public towards paedophilia could make the existing barriers for paedophiles to seek help even greater. in order to overcome these obstacles and ac tually achieve a preventative effect it is important that myths in relation to perpetrators of sexual abuse are dispelled and that the public are educated as to the nature of victims and perpetrators. . . conclusion evidence based prevention policy the two greatest challenges we face in the prevention of child pornography and the closely associated wider phenomenon of sexual abuse of children involve the translation of knowledge and expertise into evidence based prevention policy on the one hand and prevention at each of the three prevention levels on the other hand. it should therefore be recommended that an all encompassing evidence based preven tion strategy must be developed which will combine primary secondary and tertiary prevention measures. prevention measures concerning perpetrators prevention measures in the perpetrators target group currently focus upon those who already have con victions and far less upon prevention with respect to individuals who are at higher risk of committing a sexual offence against children for the first time but have not yet done so. a very promising measure that also targets individuals who have not yet committed offences entailing production distribution or possession of child abuse material or sexual abuse of children will be the introduction of the british initiated helpline stop it now in the netherlands in . prevention measures concerning victims in the context of the prevention of sexual abuse of children a great deal of emphasis is placed upon the potential victims. this is not entirely without contention however. the social sciences community has expressed criticism of the fact that the responsibility for prevention of sexual abuse is placed with children whilst adults are the ones who should bear responsibility for children s safety. in addition little is known of the actual preventative effect of prevention programmes targeted at children and many programmes pay no attention to new media and the risks that these pose to young people. all preven tion projects concerned with sexual abuse must therefore expressly address the dangers associated with online behaviour including those in relation to child pornography. situational prevention as far as many perpetrators are concerned an important reason for abusing children is that they have the opportunity to do so. the purpose of situational prevention is to remove this opportunity or to reduce the number of opportunities. the gunning committee has proposed a number of measures with regard to situational prevention which include measures to implement the four eyes principle center for sex offender management b p. . for further information regarding perpetrators and victims see . . and . . . center for sex offender management b pp. . smallbone et al. pp. . smallbone et al. p. . smallbone et al. p. . see also . . on the distinction between preferential and situational offenders. implementation and a registration system for staff of day nurseries. although the gunning committee concerned itself exclusively with day nurseries it could or should also be possible to apply such measures in other sectors in which people work with children. public prevention a fourth target group that can form the focus of prevention measures is the general public. although the general public are well aware of the phenomena of child sexual abuse and child pornography many misconceptions exist in relation to perpetrators and victims of such offences. moreover detailed re porting of major abuse cases can give rise to anxiety amongst the public whilst they are not given the means to protect themselves and their children from abuse. to this end it could be useful to take an approach such as that of a public health model in which sexual abuse of children is viewed within the broader context of public health. such a model can focus upon education and the identification of risks and it can also target perpetrators. the absence of accurate information and the attitude of the public towards paedophilia can make the existing barriers for paedophiles to seek help even greater. in order to overcome these obstacles and actually achieve a preventative effect it is important that the public is informed of the nature of victims and perpetrators. as yet no such approach is used in the netherlands. . identification recording in the previous paragraph . we discussed the primary and secondary prevention of sexual vio lence against children including child pornography. during that particular discussion the prevention of sexual violence is focused upon up to the point at which sexual violence offline and or online actually took place. from that point onwards it is important to prevent recidivism and revictimisation from occurring or in other words to ensure that tertiary prevention measures are taken in accordance with smallbone s prevention model. the identification of sexual violence against children and more specifically child abuse material forms a part of tertiary prevention that is strongly emphasized. after all if sexual violence is not noticed it is not possible to take any intervention measures in order to pre vent further violence. tertiary prevention therefore begins with recognising the indicators and further to this reporting them to the appropriate authorities. in this section we will explain these measures with regard to the situation in the netherlands. in this regard we will also examine the extent to which the authorities involved are digitally aware digitally accessible and digitally competent as these all form requisites that will enable the authorities to connect with the present living environment of children young people. the interventions that are used as a result of indicators being reported in order to prevent further sexual violence will be discussed in the section on after care and monitoring . . this section will focus exclusively on the stage of identification within the scope of tertiary prevention of child pornography or in a broader context of sexual violence against children. identification can take place with respect to perpetrators victims and or content and this section is structured according to these distinctions. in . . the identification of perpetrators will be described and in . . we will look at the identification of victims. both sub sections aim to answer the following questions see . . table . table . . see . . for a description of smallbone s prevention model. subsidy application for the action plan towards a digital competence in the police force in their role to protect youth expertgroep digikids august . see . . . . for further information. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur who are the potential identifiers of perpetrators or victims to what extent are the identifiers able to recognise indicators of the actions of a perpetrator or of a situation where an individual has become a victim to which authorities are identifiers able to report the indicators that they have noticed we will then show the statistical data from the stated authorities to whom such indicators can be re ported if available. this will enable us to gain an impression of the number of reports concerning sexual violence against children child abuse material in the netherlands. section . . will examine the identification of abusive content. this type of identification does not necessarily have to take place in the immediate environment of the perpetrators and or victims but will in particular take place on the internet. as a result the range of potential locations in which child abuse material can be identified is relatively large in comparison with the numbers of perpetrators and victims. the authorities to whom identified content can be reported will also be discussed as well as the available data. finally in . . we will present the summary and conclusions with regard to the identification and registration of child abuse material in the netherlands. for details of a number of initiatives focusing upon the identifica tion of child abuse material that have been developed by public and private parties please refer to . . . . the identification of perpetrators we can in any case distinguish between two groups of individuals apart from the police who may function as potential identifiers of situations where acts may have been committed by perpetrators the perpetrators themselves and individuals in the perpetrators immediate environment to date little or no resources have been devoted in the netherlands towards raising awareness within society of how to recognise indicators of situations where acts potentially have been committed by perpetrators and what to do in such an event. the extent to which potential perpetrators themselves and individuals in close proximity to perpetrators are able to recognise indicators as such is not known nor do we know whether or how identifiers act if they suspect that acts have been committed. where can perpetrator identifiers report indicators that they have found perpetrators of sexual violence against children child pornography who are not yet known to the au thorities or potential perpetrators who are concerned about their own thoughts and or future behav iour online do not yet have anyone to whom they can turn in the netherlands. individuals in the united kingdom and ireland can contact the stop it now project as well as other initiatives. the de the immediate environment also refers to the online environment. this therefore also concerns secondary prevention in accordance with smallbone s prevention model see . . . in this context see article of the convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series . this arti cle requires states to do the following each party shall ensure that persons who fear that they might commit any of the offences established in accordance with this convention may have access where appropriate to effective interven tion programmes or measures designed to evaluate and prevent the risk of offences being committed. the explanatory memorandum states with regard to this article that means of intervention and treatment already exist in the mainstream mental healthcare sector in the netherlands parliamentary papers ii no. p. . however these do not seem to be sufficient and are specifically geared towards the treatment of individuals who have already committed acts of sexual violence against children offline or online . implementation waag outpatient forensic centre and the hotline combating child pornography on the internet are currently involved in setting up a similar project in the netherlands. for this reason in section . . . we will focus our attention on stop it now uk ireland including the numbers of reports they have received. it goes without saying that individuals in close proximity to perpetrators who notice indica tors of sexual violence against children child pornography can pass on this information to the police. in that regard the police is therefore one of the authorities to which individuals can report indicators of situations where acts may potentially have been committed furthermore the police also identify such cases themselves. further information relating to reports of child pornography to the police and the identification detection of potential cases by the police can be found in . . . however it is often the case that identifiers living or working in close proximity to perpetrators have a family connection or friendship with the perpetrator and the act of reporting him her to the police is a major step which may be too difficult to take. what they can do however is report the information anonymously to stichting m. report crime anonymously and in future they can also potentially contact the netherlands version of stop it now . we will describe stichting m. report crime anonymously and the annual numbers of reports that it receives in . . . . . . . stop it now uk ireland stop it now uk ireland is one of the projects run by the lucy faithfull foundation and was estab lished in . the activities of stop it now are based upon the aforementioned prevention model of smallbone and these activities therefore focus upon the primary secondary and tertiary prevention of sexual violence against children whereby the emphasis is placed upon the secondary and tertiary prevention of the potential capacity to be a perpetrator. that is why we already mentioned the project in . . . as early identification by stop it now is regarded as one of the most important aspects in the prevention of first or repeated offending we decided to discuss the project in this section instead of in the section on after care and monitoring of perpetrators . . for adults who are concerned about the hotline combating child pornography on the internet is also charged with handling reports of potentially abusive content involving children and handling reports from victims of online abuse via helpwanted.nl. it is therefore important that this new task will be undertaken strictly separately from its other duties in order to prevent the appearance of a conflict of interests. it is expected that this project will be launched in . information supplied by hotline combating child pornography on the internet march information supplied verbally by stop it now working visit on march ministry of security justice first progress report on tackling child pornography march toezicht nodig voor zedenplegers monitoring necessary for sex offenders dagblad de pers may . in applying these statistical data to the situation in the netherlands it should be noted that the popu lation of the united kingdom and ireland in was four times as great as the population of the netherlands approximately . million compared with . million . other factors such as differences in density of internet use or availability which influences online behaviour and child pornography between the countries must also be taken into account see . . . see www.stopitnow.org.uk viewed september . see . . . the identification of criminal acts that may potentially be committed in the future sexual violence against children offline or online before it has occurred secondary prevention or before it is re peated tertiary prevention . http helpwanted.nl http www.stopitnow.org.uk child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur their own or another individual s sexual thoughts and or behaviour stop it now also offers a free anonymous helpline telephone or e mail which provides a safe place to speak in confidence receive advice and to make a decision as to what action must be taken. the helpline can be contacted monday to thursday between . am and . pm and on friday between . am and . pm. stop it now also offers help to individuals who have contacted them such as in the form of therapy. croga croga is a free and anonymous self help website especially for individuals who are concerned about their own sexual behaviour online and wish to seek help in that regard. it is a partnership between stop it now the lucy faithfull foundation and two universities and is also funded by the eu. croga provides information concerning child pornography on the internet and also concerning the consequences for the perpetrator and the victim identifies problematic online be haviour on the part of the individual who visits the site and assists the individual in changing this behaviour. the website is regarded by stop it now as a very valuable tool but one that has become very outdated. in addition to an update of the croga website stop it now also advocates a croga service especially for family members and friends of perpetrators. recording of data by stop it now stop it now received more than telephone calls between june and january . in it received an average of telephone calls per month from different individuals and e mails. these might be individuals who have not yet committed a criminal offence but are concerned about their thoughts future behaviour offline or online secondary prevention individuals whether or not known to the authorities who have already committed acts of sexual violence against children offline or online tertiary prevention or family members and friends of potential perpetrators both secondary and tertiary prevention . if an individual who contacts the helpline supplies personal details stop it now may involve the police particularly if it is strongly suspected that a child is in danger. for that matter finkelhor notes the following with regard to a hotline for potential perpetrators. the confidentiality offered to potential perpetrators when they contact the hotline is difficult to reconcile with the current retaliatory climate that exists within society and it is difficult to justify on ethical grounds. finkelhor . both group therapies for example those especially for individuals who have only committed sex offences online offences such as viewing child abuse images on the internet and grooming without intending to actually meet the minor or especially for family members and friends of perpetrators and therapy on an individual basis. see www.croga.org viewed september . the website is currently available in english spanish italian and polish. a translation into finnish is also underway. this concerns behaviour such as viewing child abuse material on the internet or grooming or the need to do so. university college cork ireland and universidad de almeria spain. information supplied verbally by stop it now working visit on march . in belgium a website is available for parents children or partners of sex offenders see www.familievan.be viewed septem ber . information supplied verbally by stop it now working visit on march . http www.croga.org http www.familievan.be implementation table . shows how many different people contacted the stop it now helpline in the period of june to november inclusive . years . it also shows the reasons why individuals contacted the helpline. table . number of individuals who contacted the stop it now helpline june to november inclusive reason for contacting stop it now numbers of different individuals n of sub category of total adult calling on his her own behalf sexual offence committed offline concern regarding thoughts offline sexual offence committed online concern regarding behaviour online . . adult calling with regard to another adult partner of individual concerned parent or step parent of individual concerned ex partner of individual concerned child of individual concerned friend of individual concerned brother or sister or brother sister in law or step brother sister of individual concerned other relationship to the individual concerned relationship to individual concerned unknown . adult calling with regard to a minor miscellaneous . total . n a source stop it now they contacted the helpline on occasions in total which equates to of the total number of telephone calls including e mails in the period june to november inclusive. including acquaintances other family members neighbours and colleagues of the individual con cerned or strangers. they contacted the helpline on occasions in total which equates to of . the helpline report does not state absolute numbers. the absolute numbers have been calculated on the basis of the given percentages and for this reason the figures provided here concern estimates instead of exact numbers. this percentage is stated in the helpline report however we have taken to be here i.e. exclusive of the unknown category. they contacted the helpline on occasions in total which equates to of . including adults who are concerned about a potential victim professionals victims who have since become adults individuals who require general information and children. they contacted the helpline on occasions in total which equates to of . they contacted the helpline on occasions in total. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur over the total period of . years different people contacted the stop it now helpline times. thirty five percent of individuals contacted the helpline due to concerns about their own thoughts or behaviour offline or online. this figure concerns men in particular who contacted the helpline three times on average. they account for half of all calls and e mails to stop it now . the majority of potential offline perpetrators had not yet been arrested or come into contact with the authorities. the reverse was true in the case of potential online perpetrators. twenty seven percent of individu als contacted the helpline due to concerns about the behaviour of another adult. this group largely consisted of women who usually were partners family members or friends of the individual concerned. these individuals accounted for of all contact made to stop it now only of indi viduals contacted the helpline due to concerns about the behaviour of a minor which represents of all contact with the helpline. the majority of this group consisted of parents of the child concerned of which were women. the minors concerned were usually boys amongst whom the age group of years old is the most represented. the number of different individuals who have contacted stop it now has increased over the years and the number of adult individuals who have contacted the helpline due to concerns about them selves has even doubled in the time span shown. online behaviour particularly child abuse mate rial and grooming also plays an increasingly significant role within this group. whenever stop it now or the subject of sexual violence against children features in the media the number of tel ephone calls to the helpline increases markedly for some time. this suggests that if there were greater and continuous publicity the helpline of stop it now would even be used much more often than at present. . . . stichting m. report crime anonymously stichting m. hereafter report crime anonymously is an independent foundation that aims to in volve citizens in tackling crime. it receives financial support from parties including the ministry of security and justice the ministry of the interior and kingdom relations the dutch association of insurers and the board of chief officers of police. report crime anonymously provides a free hotline on which by calling the hotline individuals can provide information anonymously stop it now p. . stop it now p. . the police and the probation service are making an increasing number of referrals to stop it now stop it now . stop it now p. . in the sense of the child as a perpetrator. the helpline is not intended for victims they are referred to other organisations. stop it now p. . from around individuals contacting the helpline on around occasions in the period june to august inclusive to around individuals contacting the helpline on around occasions in the period september to november inclusive. stop it now pp. . from around calls e mails in the period june to august inclusive to around calls e mails in the period september to november inclusive stop it now p. . information supplied verbally by stop it now working visit on march stop it now p. . see www.meldmisdaadanoniem.nl viewed september . http www.meldmisdaadanoniem.nl implementation in dutch english or german about crimes including child pornography. the hotline can be con tacted monday to friday between . am and . am and at the weekend and on public holidays between . am and . pm. the reports are forwarded by report crime anonymously to partners in the public and private sector such as the police. the reported information can be investigated by these partners and on average action including arrests can ultimately be taken in one in every nine cases. recording of data by report crime anonymously table . shows the number of reports concerning child pornography received by report crime anony mously for the years and . these concern addressable reports that have been sent to the police forces by the foundation. table . number of reports of child pornography to report crime anonymously n source stichting m. information supplied at the request of bnrm in reports of child pornography were made anonymously. this therefore equates to an aver age of three to four reports per month and this trend continued up to and including november . in december the foundation in fact received as many as anonymous reports. the total number of reports in therefore rose by more compared with n compared with n . this sudden increase can be explained as being the result of media reporting of the amsterdam sexual abuse case. further to this case report crime anonymously received far more reports than usual of sexual violence against children and child pornography. unfortunately it is not known whether any follow up action was taken with regard to the reports of child pornography that were forwarded onwards by report crime anonymously there is therefore still potential for the police to increase the amount of feedback that they provide to report crime anonymously. feedback was only received in re lation to three cases out of all reports of child pornography that were forwarded in and n . . . the identification of victims we can distinguish between three groups of individuals who could act as potential identifiers victims themselves individuals from the personal environment of the victims personal circle of family friends neighbours professionals working in close proximity to victims the netherlands government has made efforts to increase awareness amongst the latter two groups with regard to identifying children who have been victims and how to act after having identified them. based on feedback in of cases. range one report in april and seven reports in july . range zero reports in august and reports in december . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the identification of children who have been victims by individuals in victims personal environment in this context the public campaign kindermishandeling wat kan ik doen child abuse what can i do is worth mentioning. this campaign was launched in by the ministry for youth and family and is currently being run by the ministry of health welfare and sport. the campaign is geared towards helping people recognise the signs of child abuse including the sexual abuse of children using means such as the online indicator identification test which was launched on june . the campaign also focuses upon what action to take after identification whereby the most obvious course of action is to contact a child abuse counselling and reporting centre amk . however with regard to this public campaign unicef argues that there are still too many instances in which child abuse is not noticed. as a result of the campaign the netherlands government information service rijksvoorlichtingsdienst public relations and communications service dienst publiek en communicatie commissioned a study into the likelihood and manner of reports made by persons in close proximity to the potential victims or perpetrators of child abuse not professionals . the building blocks for the kindermishandeling campaign between april and may motiveaction conducted research within the scope of the kinder mishandeling wat kan ik doen campaign into the issue of why so few suspicions of child abuse are reported and into the areas in which the most significant doubts and uncertainties lie in this regard. the research specifically focused upon persons in close proximity to potential victims of child abuse who are not professionals. the final random sample consisted of members of stempunt.nu between and years of age who had completed a questionnaire online. amongst other find ings it emerged from the research that practically all those in close proximity to potential victims would take action if they suspected child abuse. the interests of the child and the sense of duty to take action constitute important factors in such a case. however many respondents stated that they would only take action if they were certain that child abuse had taken place even though in more than half of cases in which child abuse was suspected it eventually turned out that it had indeed taken place. the respondents were generally quite familiar with some of the indicators of child abuse but by no means with them all. for example only of respondents counted sexually provocative behaviour by a child as potential indicators of child abuse. the respondents were not particularly aware of who they could contact to report the signs of child abuse that they in this context see article of the lanzarote convention. this article requires states to take the follow ing action each party shall promote or conduct awareness raising campaigns addressed to the general public providing information on the phenomenon of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children and on the preventive measures which can be taken. site wijst op kindermishandeling website helps to indicate child abuse spits june . unicef netherlands defence for children p. . motiveaction . only indicated that they would take no action. this group increases to when only the more pas sive course of action keeping an eye on the situation is placed under the no action category. nb. it is conceivable that social desirability forms a factor in answering this question. n of the total respondents have once had suspicions that a child had been abused. in of cases n this suspicion ultimately proved to be correct according to their own statements. the suspicion was only proved wrong in n of cases and in n of cases it never became clear as to whether or not the suspicion was well founded. http stempunt.nu implementation had observed. of the respondents who did have something of an idea has to what they could do only n cited the amk. the identification of children who have been victims by professionals in close proximity to victims a variety of means exist to assist professionals in recognising indicators of victimisation and the flags system is one example of these. the list of sexual behaviours enables professionals and parents to identify sexual behaviour exhibited by a minor as healthy or in fact inappropriate. in addition groups of professionals who may be able to spot indicators of child abuse including sexual abuse of children often work with a reporting code or a protocol derived from such guidelines. child abuse coun selling and reporting centres are also listed as the most important authorities to contact once indicators of abuse have been identified. it is claimed that research has shown that health social care workers and teachers who work with a reporting code are three times as likely to intervene as colleagues who do not have such a code available. it is expected that the dutch domestic violence and child abuse reporting code compulsory use act wet verplichte meldcode huiselijk geweld en kindermishandeling will enter into force shortly. in this context see article of the lanzarote convention. this article requires states to take the fol lowing action . each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to encourage awareness of the protection and rights of children among persons who have regular contacts with children in the education health social protection judicial and law enforcement sectors and in areas relating to sport culture and leisure activities and each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the persons referred to in paragraph have an adequate knowledge of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children of the means to identify them and of the pos sibility mentioned in article paragraph . the explanatory memorandum states with regard to this article that promoting expertise on the part of professionals and volunteers who work with children forms a specific area of attention as part of the raak strategy within the scope of action plan to tackle child abuse parliamentary papers ii no. p. . for further information regarding the raak strategy see . . . movisie . for several examples see publications by the ministry of public health welfare and sport knmg . for example the schools and safety house centrum school en veiligheid refers to the child abuse pro tocol for all professionals who work with children up to years of age and or their parents youth care agency conurbation of amsterdam amsterdam child abuse counselling and reporting centre noord holland youth care agency noord holland child abuse counselling and reporting centre . partly as a result of the raak programme and the rak strategy. for further information regarding these strategies see . . . unicef defence for children p. . one of the provisional conclusions of the samson committee is that when children reported what had happened to them sexual abuse no action was taken further to the indications given by the child in two thirds of the cases. it is claimed that this situation has not actually improved over the years. this observation will be examined in greater detail in academic sub studies which will explicitly study how government authorities have responded to signs of sexual abuse see the fourth public report of the samson committee available at www.onderzoek seksueel kindermisbruik.nl documenten openbareberichten viewed september . http www.onderzoek seksueel kindermisbruik.nl documenten openbareberichten child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur dutch domestic violence and child abuse reporting code compulsory use act a legislative proposal is currently under consideration in which professionals working in the sec tors concerned with healthcare care for the elderly care for the disabled youth care social support education and childcare as well as in the judicial sector are required to work in accordance with a reporting code whenever they encounter indicators of domestic violence or child abuse including sexual violence in the course of their work. the reporting code consists of a step by step plan that outlines the best course of action for a professional in the event that he she suspects domes tic violence or child abuse. in the basic model of the domestic violence and child abuse reporting code the second step involves consultation with colleagues and consulting the amk if minors are concerned. ultimately if the professional him herself is unable to provide sufficient protection he she should report the minor to the amk. this compulsory reporting code therefore does not make it mandatory for professionals to report issues. professionals are not required to report indicators to an amk but they are required to follow a step by step plan as part of which they are able to assess themselves whether it is necessary to report the issue to the amk. professionals who are normally bound by professional confidentiality such as paediatricians doctors etc. are entitled to report their observations however which enables doctors to supply information to the youth care agency particularly the amk without the consent of the individual concerned if this can be considered necessary in order to put an end to a child abuse situation or to investigate a reasonable suspicion of child abuse . if a professional suspects that child abuse including sexual violence has taken place he she must also consider whether to file a report in the reference index of young people at risk vir as well as acting in accordance with a reporting code or protocol. by registering a child in the vir different indicators can be gathered in one place and follow up actions can be coordinated. registration in the vir therefore forms part of the basic model of the domestic violence and child abuse reporting code and the gunning committee has also recommended that it should be used more often. see www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen huiselijk geweld hulp bieden toolkit meldcode viewed september this concerns the proposed policy. it is expected that the domestic violence and child abuse report ing code act will enter into force at the beginning of . its entry into force is subject to approval by the lower and upper houses of dutch parliament and publication in the dutch bulletin of acts and decrees. it should be noted that the dutch data protection authority cbp has expressed criticism concerning the draft legislative proposal. the cbp generally subscribes to the decisions made in the legislative bill with regard to how tools are used but it objects on the requisite legal grounds to provisions in the legislative bill that concern the processing of personal data and the rights of individuals concerned. for details of the objections of the cbp see www.cbpweb.nl pages adv z .aspx viewed september . ministry of public health welfare and sport . incidentally domestic violence and or child abuse perpetrated by professionals lie beyond the scope of the basic model. the gunning committee quoted in . . and . . amongst others is investigating this issue in detail however. see article paragraph of the dutch youth care act wet op de jeugdzorg . knmg . gunning et al. p. . http www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen huiselijk geweld hulp bieden toolkit meldcode http www.cbpweb.nl pages adv z .aspx implementation reference index of young people at risk vir chapter a national reference index landelijke verwijsindex was added to the dutch youth care act with effect from august . the reference index of young people at risk vir is an electronic system that brings together in one place reports of risk indicators received from care workers with respect to young people of up to years of age. the use of the reference index is a contributing factor in achieving more effective collaboration between care workers and municipalities. the vir is a risk identification tool. there must therefore be indications that a genuine issue exists before professionals decide to file a report to the reference index. the text of the act is formu lated as follows an individual authorised to report issues may report a juvenile to the reference index without the consent of the juvenile or his her legal representative and if necessary may breach the duty to confidentiality that applies by virtue of his her position or profession in the event that he she reasonably suspects that as a result of one or more of the risks listed below the healthy and safe development of the juvenile into adulthood is actually under threat. at this point we will look at some of the conclusions of unicef and a number of independent commit tees of inquiry with regard to the aforementioned identification of victims by professionals. with regard to the identification of victims by professionals in order to improve awareness and identification amongst professionals their training must systematically devote attention to the ways in which child abuse can be identified. the samson committee concluded for now that intensive training is required to enable care workers to recognise the indicators of sexual abuse . the gunning committee stated the following the committee concluded that staff of day nurseries often fail to recognise the signs or do not take the appropriate action. the same is also true of parents and others in the child s network and this also applies in equal measure to general practitioners and other care authorities. see www.rijksoverheid.nl nieuws verwijsindex voor risicojongeren.html viewed sep tember . wet verwijsindex risicojongeren van kracht op augustus reference index young people at risk act enters into force on august rijksoverheid.nl july available at www.rijksoverheid.nl nieuws verwijsindex voor risicojongeren.html viewed september . a guide for professionals is available for this purpose available at www.meldcriteria.nl viewed sep tember . such as child abuse including sexual violence against the juvenile. article j of the dutch youth care act. unicef defence for children p. . the samson committee is currently investigating the sexual abuse of minors who have been placed under the responsibility of the government in institutions or with foster families for further informa tion see www.onderzoek seksueel kindermisbruik.nl viewed september . the definitive findings of the investigation are expected to be published in mid . misbruik jeugd slecht herkend child abuse is frequently left unrecognised de telegraaf june . the gunning committee conducted investigations into the amsterdam sexual abuse case. gunning et al. p. . http www.rijksoverheid.nl nieuws verwijsindex voor risicojongeren.html http rijksoverheid.nl http www.rijksoverheid.nl nieuws verwijsindex voor risicojongeren.html http www.rijksoverheid.nl nieuws verwijsindex voor risicojongeren.html http www.meldcriteria.nl http www.onderzoek seksueel kindermisbruik.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur with regard to taking action once victims have been identified by professionals it is imperative that all groups of professionals who work with children are aware of their responsibility to identify child abuse and to act immediately if they suspect that child abuse has taken place . it is impor tant that every group of professionals who work with children should have a reporting code available to them as soon as possible . in this context the gunning committee recommended the following if sexual abuse of children within or outside of the day nursery is suspected this must result in contact with the authorities that possess expertise in this area. the amk is the most obvious one. the committee does not advocate an obligation to report issues but rather a duty to consult the amk for advice. to summarise significant steps have already been taken with regard to the identification of victimisa tion resulting from sexual violence against children and with regard to the appropriate action taken subsequently by persons in close proximity to potential victims both in the child s personal sphere and in a professional capacity. however it is important that these actions are continued and that the programme of measures is developed further. unicef has also made the following conclusion prevention of child abuse can only be achieved if the government experts and professionals involved take an active position and if society as a whole adopts a vigilant attitude. it should be noted in this regard that sexual violence against children is increasingly related to ict so it is important that those living and work ing in close proximity to children also take account of potential indicators of victimisation in the digital world. where can identifiers of victims report the indicators they have observed victims of sexual violence against children child pornography can contact organisations such as kindertelefoon . . . anonymously if desired and helpwanted.nl . . . specifically in the case of online abuse. at the time of writing the digivaardig digibewust programme ecp epn is involved in developing an online reporting button for victims of online abuse in conjunction with organisations including the hotline combating child pornography on the internet and the kindertelefoon. further information can be found in the sub section on helpwanted.nl. individuals in close proximity to victims both in the personal sphere and in a professional capacity who observe indicators of sexual violence against children child pornography can contact a variety of organisations. the child abuse counselling and reporting centre amks is the most obvious port of call. we will therefore look at this organisa tion in detail in . . . . the three aforementioned authorities kindertelefoon helpwanted.nl and the amks record the reports that they receive concerning indicators of amongst other things sexual vio unicef defence for children p. . gunning et al. p. . unicef defence for children p. . nyman . ministry of security and justice first progress report on tackling child pornography march hotline combating child pornography on the internet information supplied verbally by ecp epn may digivaardig digibewust programme information received in writing at the request of bnrm june . indicators can also be reported to or noted by other authorities such as the youth care agencies. in some cases these authorities subsequently report such indicators to an amk but this is certainly not always the case. http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl implementation lence against children. we will examine the extent to which attention is also paid to child abuse material in later sub sections. . . . the kindertelefoon service the kindertelefoon service was established in and forms part of the youth care agency. it is an organisation that offers children between the ages of eight and eighteen someone to contact free of charge by telephone or via the chatroom msn in order to talk anonymously if so desired about issues and problems including sexual violence. the kindertelefoon service currently has branches in the netherlands and is staffed by volunteers who have all followed the same course of training at the kindertelefoon academy. the service can be contacted days a year from . pm to . pm and provides children with information or advice or offers support. in kindertelefoon began an active policy of referrals to the youth care agency whenever a child is at risk and consents to the referral. recording of data by kindertelefoon in kindertelefoon received calls held chat sessions and its website was viewed times. of all telephone and chatroom conversations were deemed serious which equates to just of the total number of conversations. girls contact kindertelefoon more frequently than boys and the age group twelve up to and including fifteen years is the most represented. eight percent of all children who were genuine callers to kindertelefoon talked about violence and this mainly involves physical abuse but sexual violence also falls into this category. information about child por nography is not available. the kindertelefoon service is a member of child helpline international chi the international network of child helplines. the publications of the chi in included violence against children fourth child helpline international report which provided information concerning all cases of abuse and violence that were reported by children to helplines of all chi members including kindertelefoon in the landelijk bureau kindertelefoon national office of kindertelefoon . since it has been possible to call free of charge using a mobile telephone which resulted in a substantial increase in the number of calls unfortunately the number of non serious calls also increased . children and young people who find themselves at risk and contact the kindertelefoon service are carefully transferred to a member of staff of the youth care agency by means of a group call. this may only take place once the child has provided his her consent to this and waives his her anonymity. a professional care worker at the youth care agency takes over the conversation and the child is given help straight away in order to ensure safety. national office of kindertelefoon . see www.kindertelefoon.nl viewed september . telephone conversations and chatroom conversations. it is regularly the case that people call or chat for non serious purposes these are in particular silent calls potentially children who are afraid to talk test calls or are in fact non serious conversations. the ratio of girls to boys is approximately in telephone conversations and in chat conversations. this can be divided into physical abuse harassment sexual abuse emotional abuse neglect and physi cal punishment. http www.kindertelefoon.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur netherlands in . information about reports of online abuse was also gathered from helplines including kindertelefoon in the netherlands. table . shows a selection of relevant figures taken from the aforementioned research by chi. table . reports of abuse and violence and online abuse helplines helplines kindertelefoon of contact made to kindertelefoon of contact made to hel plines n n n abuse and violence . n a n a . sexual abuse . n a n a . online abuse n a n a . source child helpline international and additional information supplied by chi at the request of bnrm in cases of sexual abuse were reported to kindertelefoon which equates to of all reports relating to abuse and violence that are sent to the organisation. unfortunately there is no information available with regard to child abuse material in the reports of sexual abuse. the reports of online abuse sent to kindertelefoon all relate to online harassment. table . shows the gender and age distribution of the children who reported incidences of sexual abuse to kindertelefoon in . this can be divided into online harassment harmful sexual content harmful violent content other harmful content contact with sexual predators online coercion to do something requests for infor mation relating to online abuse and other issues related to online abuse. when this figure is compared with the annual report of kindertelefoon national office of kindertelefoon the following striking finding emerges. according to the annual report serious reports were made of which . related to sexual abuse and . related to harassment. this would equate to approximately reports which is likely to include the cases of online harassment. if we take these away we end up with reports of abuse and violence in accordance with the definition from the violence against children report child helpline international whilst according to this research children have reported these incidents to kindertelefoon. this difference can probably be explained by the fact that some children report both sexual abuse and har assment. these children are counted in both the violence and harassment categories in the annual report of kindertelefoon national office of kindertelefoon whilst they are only included once in the abuse and violence category in the violence against children report child helpline international . implementation table . reports of sexual abuse to the kindertelefoon service by gender and age male female unknown total n n n n years years years years . . years unknown total n . . total source child helpline international and additional information supplied by chi at the request of bnrm reports of sexual abuse are received by kindertelefoon more frequently from girls than is the case with regard to other problems that are reported the ratio of girls to boys is approximately in this case . the greatest number of cases are found in the age group years just as is the case for other issues. a fifth of reports come from children below that age. . . . helpwanted.nl in mid helpwanted.nl was set up as part of hotline combating child pornography on the internet as a result of the considerable number of reports that the hotline received from young people. these reports related to sexual abuse on social profile sites and via chat rooms and the webcam. helpwanted.nl enables young people between the ages of twelve and eighteen years to report online sexual abuse using a report form and to do so anonymously if they wish. they can also ask questions directly by e mail or during a chat session. helpwanted.nl also provides information on the safe use of the internet and provides the names of care agencies that children and young people and parents can contact if they are harassed on the internet. the website therefore not only has the role of identifying issues but also has an informative role primary and or secondary prevention . recording of data by helpwanted.nl table . shows the number of reports to helpwanted.nl for the years to inclusive. meldpunt kinderporno op internet a . this six month pilot scheme was started at the end of . the chatroom facility has since been ex tended and it is possible to chat monday to friday from . pm to . pm. helpwanted.nl is also regularly involved in virtual worlds such as gosupermodel.nl and once per week in habbo . these figures only include reports made using the report form on the website. http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl http gosupermodel.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table . number of reports to helpwanted.nl total n source meldpunt kinderporno op internet a annual reports to inclusive in the campaign cyberlokkers laten niet los cyber predators do not give up generated a great deal of publicity for helpwanted.nl. several campaigns were also run in and the effects are clearly evident in the figures. not all reports that are received by helpwanted.nl exclusively relate to online sexual abuse. in of all reports involved online sexual abuse and involved encountering child abuse material. in of all reports involved sexual abuse via a chat facility and involved encountering child abuse material. in of all reports involved webcam based abuse and involved encountering child abuse material. online reporting button for young people european commissioner neelie kroes advocates the use of a virtual emergency button for young people. in the netherlands this measure is currently under development. online reporting button the initiators of the online reporting button in the netherlands are the hotline combating child pornography on the internet and the digivaardig digibewust programme. various organisations are currently working on the development of the online reporting button. there are a variety of organisations in the netherlands to which young people can report issues on the internet and which provide help to them. in order to ensure visibility whilst at the same time preventing fragmentation a variety of bodies are joining forces to produce a jointly run online portal for young people who expe rience issues on the internet and need help to overcome them. the national online reporting button some examples of other types of reports cyber harassment infringement of an individual s right to control use of the image of him her hacking and so forth. the decrease in these relative figures is in particular a result of the substantial increase in the number of reports purely concerning cyber harassment in this year. digivaardig digibewust programme information supplied in writing at the request of bnrm june . they jointly form the national awareness center in the netherlands which is partly subsidised by the european safe internet programme run by european commissioner kroes. meldpunt kinderporno op internet pestweb.nl meldpunt discriminatie the police with vraaghetdepolitie. nl the online information source for young people and kindertelefoon. other parties such as hyves.nl habbo.nl gosupermodels.nl and microsoft windows live messenger are also involved. the organi sations aim to involve possible other relevant parties in this initiative such as reporting centres care agencies or online platforms for young people. http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl http pestweb.nl http vraaghetdepolitie.nl http vraaghetdepolitie.nl http hyves.nl http habbo.nl http gosupermodels.nl implementation provides a central entry point that enables young people to seek specific help. the parties involved hope to be able to launch a basic version of the online reporting button in the autumn of . this button can be downloaded as an application and is suitable for the major internet browsers. when ever a young person clicks on the reporting button he she is taken to a website where he she can submit a specific request for help and be referred to a care agency which can be contacted usually anonymously by telephone e mail or chat facility depending on the service provided by the body concerned . the basic version will then be gradually developed further. a reporting button will also be developed that websites can embed into their own content. this will enable young people to click directly on the reporting button whenever they visit a website in order to call for help with their issue. . . . child abuse counselling and reporting centre there are child abuse counselling and reporting centres amks in the netherlands that form a point of contact of the youth care agencies. anyone who knows of or suspects an incidence of child abuse including sexual violence may contact an amk. the amk can provide advice that may be followed by a consultation or it can launch an investigation. in the case of the former the individual who has con tacted the amk remains responsible for taking further action. if the amk launches an investigation a notification report is deemed to have been made and the responsibility lies with the amk. if it emerges from the investigation by the amk that child abuse has taken place the amk will ensure that the neces sary assistance and protection is provided. reports of child abuse to the amk are most frequently and increasingly sent by professionals working in close proximity to minors such as educational institu tions doctors hospitals youth healthcare institutions the police and so forth . recording of data by the child abuse counselling and reporting centres in the amks dispensed advice in relation to sexual abuse on more than separate occa sions and lent support in more than cases in a consultation concerning sexual abuse. in it is important that this behind the scenes system for the reporting button is well organised. young people must receive a response to a report within a short time. it is therefore imperative that the parties running this call button initiative coordinate their activities with one another and are able to clearly distinguish between their respective roles. the organisations must also effectively embed this additional means of seeking help into their organisation so that they are able to respond appropriately to the request for help. mogroep jeugdzorg . other forms of child abuse that are mentioned include physical abuse physical neglect psychological violence affective neglect bearing witness to domestic violence m nchhausen syndrome by proxy educational neglect and miscellaneous other mogroep jeugdzorg . in these reports accounted for approximately two thirds of all reports and in approximately three quarters of the total number of reports. the police for example report children to the amk who have been witnesses to domestic violence. how ever the police can also identify victims of sexual abuse and child pornography as part of their surveillance activities on the internet such as in habbo . further information about this can be found in . . . . this figure equates to . of mogroep jeugdzorg . whether or not in combination with a different form of child abuse mogroep jeugdzorg . this figure equates to . of mogroep jeugdzorg . whether or not in combination with a different form of child abuse mogroep jeugdzorg . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the same year the amks launched more than investigations into sexual abuse. unfortunately further information in relation to the advice consultations and reports of sexual abuse is not available from the youth care organisation jeugdzorg nederland. when they receive reports of sexual abuse the amks do not record whether images of this abuse potentially exist. this means there are no statistics relating to child abuse material in this regard. however images of sexual abuse add a further dimension to victimisation that should be a focus of attention and that should have implications with regard to the care to be provided. this aspect has been the subject of research conducted in germany. care and treatment of child victims of child pornographic exploitation cpe in germany from october to september the innocence in danger organisation conducted research into the treatment of victims of child pornography in germany. all care organisations in germany that specialise in assisting children who are victims of sexual abuse were contacted within the context of the research. one of the conclusions of the research was that due to uncertainty and a significant lack of knowledge care workers fail to address the issue of images in cases of sexual abuse so it is likely that many victims of child pornography remain unnoticed. despite this care workers recognise that victims of sexual abuse who also feature in images that have been made of them are traumatised even further and required specific care in relation to this. anyone who is responsible for children s welfare in a professional capacity must have knowledge of their living environment. today minors make frequent use of the internet and experiment online with regard to aspects of sex and relationships. there are risks associated with behaviour of a sexual nature online and these risks can increase the likelihood of sexual abuse. for this reason it is important that digital indicators including those of child pornography are noticed by amk staff. bnrm conduct ed an exploratory investigation in order to find out the extent to which child pornography and more broadly speaking digital indicators lie within the field of vision of the staff of amks. the results of this exploratory investigation will be outlined next. please refer to appendix for an explanation of the investigation. results of the exploratory investigation of amks when cases of sexual abuse are reported it is not standard practice for staff of child abuse counselling and reporting centres amks to ask whether images were also made of the abuse. a number of amks this equates to . of mogroep jeugdzorg . whether or not in combination with a different form of child abuse mogroep jeugdzorg . further information is only available in relation to the total number of occasions on which advice was dispensed consultations and reports such as the number of children who formed the subject of reports a single report may after all concern several children the children s age gender and domestic situation etc. mogroep jeugdzorg . see . . for that matter as yet there are no care services in the netherlands that are specifically specialised in this additional dimension of victimisation see . . von weiler et al. . for further results of this study see . . . these could include abnormal sexual behaviour by the child in chatrooms on social networking sites in front of a webcam or material of a sexual nature produced by the child him herself sexting see . . for further information . implementation stated explicitly that whilst this not standard practice such questions are asked if there is reason to do so. at most amks child abuse material has been reported occasionally incidentally without questions being asked in this regard by the amk staff member. the estimates of the annual number of reports to each amk that involve child abuse material range from zero to thirty. three amks did not quote any figure as they did not have them available. when sexual abuse is reported some amk staff members ask if there is reason to do so if there are any digital indicators that could constitute grounds for suspicion. questions are asked but this seems to depend on the concerns that are reported and the age of the child in question. if the report concerns adolescents behaviour online chatting using the webcam arranging to meet online friends etc. staff are attentive with regard to asking questions regarding digital indicators . in the case of reports of suspicions of sexual abuse particularly involving younger children it is not standard practice to ask whether images could have been produced. however staff are aware of the need to ask whether child pornography is being viewed or in an individual s possession if this seems relevant. in the case of most amks someone has at some point specifically reported digital indicators without questions being asked in this regard by the amk staff member. the estimates of the annual number of reports of sexual abuse to each amk that involve digital indicators range from zero to fifty. six amks did not quote any figure as they did not have any available but two amks noted that the number is on the increase. to times per year. once it concerned suspicions that younger children were being abused those cases are usually passed swiftly to the police and once per year it involves boys and girls predominantly girls who unsuspectingly display themselves. the knowledge of amk staff regarding potential digital indicators of sexual abuse varies among the separate amks as well as among the individual staff members. various branches stated that some staff already possess sufficient knowledge of these indicators but this certainly cannot be said for all staff. this is usually the result of too little experience with the internet. most amks do not yet pay full at tention to this subject in the sense of a course or training. some amks noted in this regard that this should form an area for attention in the future and one amk indicated that jeugdzorg nederland could also potentially play a role in training specifically with regard to the national basic course for amks. however unfortunately not all amks recognise the importance of this aspect. one amk in which the subject is already being given full attention stated further efforts to promote expertise are still necessary as social three amks stated that such reports are never made zero per year . eleven amks estimate the annual number of reports involving child abuse material to be between one and thirty and nine stated that there were no more than ten cases per year incl. not many and a few . one amk mentioned schools in particular as reporting parties in this context. one amk stated that such reports are never made zero per year . ten amks estimate the annual number of reports of sexual abuse involving digital indicators to be between one and fifty and eight stated that there were no more than ten cases per year incl. a few probably a small number and it is sometimes the case that reports are made as a result of communications by children young people on social media or for example an expectant mother who offered her child for sale on the internet but no reports were received of information regarding chatroom content or images of involving youngsters. for example it has been claimed that there is no demand for it that amk staff conduct investigations in families and not on the internet etc. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur media are developing extremely rapidly. in response to the question what is action is taken by amk staff in the event of a report involving child abuse material most amks briefly described the action protocol for reports of sexual abuse. this seems to indicate that the existence of images of the sexual abuse of a child is usually not recognised as a specific request for help. one amk therefore indicated that no policy was in place that explicitly related to child pornography. practically all amks stated that they contact the police. some expressly stated in this regard that they encourage the individual reporting the matter to make a statement and if this is not successful they state that the amk itself will file a report. within this context one amk cited the protocol that youth care agencies the police and the public prosecu tion service have recently agreed upon which is intended to result in more cases being reported to the police by amks in the future. the protocol contains cooperative agreements that simplify the process of sending reports to the police by the amks. a standard report form is now being used and information is regularly shared between police officers and care workers which will benefit criminal investigations and care provision. in addition many amks stated that arrangements are made for appropriate care if necessary. however not one single amk stated in this regard that specific care provision is offered with regard to sexual abuse involving the production of images. one amk noted the following we assess whether assistance is required but it is often necessary to leave matters as they are for the purpose of the police investigation and to avoid the interference of care provision in the reporting stage. hopefully improvements in how information is shared between the police and the care authorities will ensure that these types of situations will arise less frequently in the future see the aforementioned protocol . the following aspects were also cited by a number of amks ensuring safety providing protection for victims signs of safety the joint handling of a report of sexual abuse seeking compulsory treatment for the perpetrator conducting an investigation of suspected sexual abuse an investigation of sexual abuse always involves questioning parents regarding access to pornography on the internet tv in printed form the examination of children or sending them for examination for indicators or verbal expressions of sexually inappropriate behaviour. collaboration with several cooperating partners in the event of more than one victim being involved in cases involving multiple victims we will also seek collaboration with the municipality in sexual abuse scenarios and in scenarios in which the municipal health service is involved. concluding remarks child pornography as an additional dimension in victimisation as a result of sexual abuse is not yet being sufficiently acknowledged within amks. it is not standard practice for amk staff members to ask whether such material could be involved. it is quite conceivable that child abuse material both with regard to care provision and the police. the protocol reports of child abuse sent by youth care agencies to the police and the public prosecu tion service signed on april . integrale aanpak kindermishandeling jeugdzorg politie en om youth care sector police and public prosecution service adopt an integrated approach towards tackling child abuse anp perssupport april available at new.perssupport.nl apssite persberichten full integrale aanpak kindermis handeling jeugdzorg politie en om viewed september . for that matter every amk investigates sexual abuse if such a case has been reported. http new.perssupport.nl apssite persberichten full integrale aanpak kindermishandeling jeugdzorg politie en om implementation could be involved in far greater numbers of sexual abuse cases than expected. furthermore there is no specialised care provision available in this context and the netherlands could potentially draw on expertise in this area from other countries. child abuse material can also serve as supporting evidence confirmation of suspicions that abuse has taken place. there is also still room for improvement with regard to the acquisition of knowledge by amk staff in relation to child abuse material and more broadly speaking digital indicators of sexual abuse. what is required in order to achieve this is that amk staff members recognise the importance of this but unfortunately that is not yet always the case at many amks. it is also important that the knowledge acquired is kept up to date. considerable progress has already been made as far as improving collaboration between amks and the police is concerned which has resulted in the protocol reports of child abuse sent by youth care agencies to the police and the public prosecution service . hopefully we will be able to see the success of this collaboration in the future. . . the identification of content the most important identifiers of abusive content are internet users. individuals who are undesirably confronted with suspected child abuse material on the internet can report it to the privately run hot line combating child pornography on the internet . . . or the cyber crime reporting website run by the police . . . . . . . the hotline combating child pornography on the internet the hotline combating child pornography on the internet meldpunt kinderporno op internet was officially opened in and has been a member of inhope the international network of hotlines since its establishment in . the principal role of the hotline is to handle reports of suspected child abuse material on the internet. the reports received by the hotline come from two sources internet users can report suspected criminal content on the internet via the website whilst remain ing anonymous if desired. counterpart hotlines that are affiliated with the inhope network forward reports if they concern child abuse material being hosted on a server in the netherlands. the hotline records all reports in its database and these have also been recorded in the inhope database since january . the reported content is classified in accordance with the implementation provisions concerning child pornography in order to assess whether the material in question constitutes a criminal offence child pornography. investigations are conducted with regard to all material constituting criminal offences to find out from which country the material was distributed. if it concerns child abuse material hosted in another country the hotline forwards the report to its counterpart hotline in such as the usa cacs and sweden barnahus see . . . see . . boxed text digital child abuse material and ict as an opportunity. meldpunt kinderporno op internet a annual reports to inclusive . for further information regarding inhope see . . . see www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl viewed september . according to the national legislation in the country concerned that sends the report. see . . . . the police are consulted in the event of any doubt. http www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the country concerned via the inhope database. if it concerns child abuse material hosted in the netherlands the hotline notifies the police. the hotline also then verifies whether the material has actually been removed and sends a reminder to the national police services agency klpd after five days. in the event that the content has not been removed after a week the hotline sends a notice to the internet service provider. in the uk the counterpart hotline internet watch founda tion iwf contacts the isps directly rather than via the police. the content is then removed within a few hours. recording of data by hotline combating child pornography on the internet figure . shows the trend in the number of reports including content reported in duplicate received by the hotline combating child pornography on the internet in the period . figure . annual number of reports to the hotline combating child pornography on the internet including content reported in duplicate n um be r year number of reports in the hotline began using a different report form. this offers a likely explanation of the fall in the trend that can be seen in that year. every year since has seen an increase in the number of re ports up to reports in . these are not all unique though as it may be the case that different reports relate to the same content. the continuous increase in the number of reports can probably be explained by the following factors the exponential growth in the number of internet users the ever expanding inhope network the rise in the amount of child abuse material on the internet and the if no counterpart hotline exists in the country concerned the report is forwarded to the police who then contact the police force in that country. internet watch foundation annual reports and . see . . . boxed text perspective regarding the removal of material. please refer to appendix table b . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data. information supplied verbally by hotline combating child pornography on the internet march . the proportion of reports sent from inhope is increasing over time. to illustrate in one tenth of all reports were sent from inhope and this rose to one third in see appendix table b . . this considerable increase emphasises the importance of hotlines working in an international partnership. implementation rising profile of the hotline. figure . shows the trends in reports of suspected child abuse material in the two main places where such material is found that were received by the hotline in the period . figure . annual reports including content reported in duplicate according to place where found year e mail website a m ou nt in the time scale shown the majority of all suspected child abuse material reported was found on web sites or received by e mail between in and in . the proportion of suspected mate rial received by e mail was greatest up to and including . however since e mail has only played a small role which is still declining from in to in . it is possible that e mail is being used less and less as a means of distributing child abuse material. however the introduction of the new report form on the hotline website could partially account for this fall in the trend. other places where material has been found include newsgroups chat rooms and peer to peer programs for example. figure . shows the proportion of unique reports that actually involve child abuse material according to the hotline combating child pornography on the internet compared with the total number of unique reports i.e. not including content reported in duplicate shown for the years to inclusive. this information was not available for previous years. including content reported in duplicate. please refer to appendix table b . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data. this in fact also includes the years not shown here meldpunt kinderporno op internet annual reports to inclusive . information supplied verbally by meldpunt kinderporno op internet april . please refer to appendix table b . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur figure . proportion of unique reports relating to child abuse material compared with the total number of unique reports year reports in relation to child abuse material the annual proportion of reports actually involving child abuse material varies in the period shown between n and n . other reports for example involved material that does not constitute a criminal offence such as child erotica child nudity adult pornography and so forth. some of the material concerned in the reports in each year could not be found or was inaccessible between in and and in . figure . shows the proportion of unique reports of child abuse material distributed from the neth erlands compared with the total number of unique reports of child abuse material for the period . figure . proportion of unique reports of child abuse material on servers hosted in the netherlands compared with the total number of unique reports of child abuse material year reports in relation to child abuse material hosted on servers in the netherlands in reports of child abuse material mostly related to material hosted in other countries and the proportion hosted in the netherlands was no more than . over the past few years however material please refer to appendix table b . for the table with a complete and detailed overview of these data implementation on servers in the netherlands is being reported far more frequently in the proportion hosted on servers in the netherlands rose to as much as n . a large proportion of child abuse material hosted in the netherlands is supplied via upload services. the hotline forwarded the reports it received in relating to child pornography hosted on servers in the netherlands to the police. the police contacted the hosting providers in these cases in order to have the material removed and ultimately drew up five official reports in relation to suspects of dutch nationality. the hotline combating child pornography on the internet supplied information at the request of bnrm in relation to the victims who were depicted in the reported child abuse material on servers in the neth erlands. figure . and figure . show the gender and age distribution of those victims. figure . gender distribution amongst victims depicted in the incidences of child abuse material on servers in the netherlands that were reported in female both male unknown source additional information supplied by meldpunt kinderporno op internet at the request of bnrm. girls featured more frequently in child abuse material on servers in the netherlands that was reported in n than boys . servers in the united states of america account for a quarter of the child abuse material that was re ported and servers in russia host meldpunt kinderporno op internet . meldpunt kinderporno op internet . excluding the cases in which the material was removed in the meantime or in which no material con stituting a criminal offence featuring children was found. the owners of the sites in question often reside in other countries and do not hold dutch nationality meldpunt kinderporno op internet b parliamentary papers ii . vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur figure . age distribution amongst victims depicted in the incidences of child abuse material on servers in the netherlands that were reported in years years years unknown source additional information supplied by meldpunt kinderporno op internet at the request of bnrm. the pre adolescent three to twelve years age group is the most represented . . . . the cyber crime reporting website the cyber crime reporting website meldpunt cybercrime is a point of contact operated by the police to which child pornography including contacting children for sexual purposes child sex tourism or ter rorism on or via the internet with its source in the netherlands can be reported. it started life as a project in set up as a result of an initiative of the ministry of justice and the ministry of the interior and kingdom relations and the national coordinator for counterterrorism and security. since november it has formed part of the klpd. information submitted to the cyber crime reporting website does not constitute an official report. information submitted via the website arrives at the intake unit of the klpd emergency service where the reports are viewed hours a day days a week. individuals who submit notifications citizens classify them as child pornography child sex tourism incite ment to hatred and terrorism or other . the staff of the intake unit verify this and indicate the urgency level. the information submitted is then sent to the back office for the content to be processed. cases of child pornography involve team beeld en internet the images and internet team of the department of international police information dienst ipol . this team contacts isps social networking sites and so forth in order to ensure that criminal content is removed as soon as possible notice and take down . finally the information is sent to a regional police force which conducts the investigation from that point onwards. these age groups are derived from the labels infant pre pubescent and pubescent as recorded by hotlines via inhope. it is possible that in other countries different age groups may apply to these labels and consequently figure . may present a somewhat distorted picture. see www.meldpuntcybercrime.nl viewed september information supplied verbally by meldpunt cybercrime may . http www.meldpuntcybercrime.nl implementation recording of data by the cyber crime reporting website table . shows the number of reports to the cyber crime reporting website in relation to child porno graphy for the years to inclusive. these child pornography reports largely concern grooming related cases. table . number of reports of child pornography to meldpunt cybercrime total n . source meldpunt cybercrime information supplied at the request of bnrm the figures clearly show that the cyber crime reporting website meldpunt cybercrime drew greater atten tion in than in the two successive years. however recent or current events such as the amsterdam sexual abuse case also had an effect upon the number of reports made. for example roughly twice as many reports made were in relation to child pornography in the months december and january as the number of reports in the preceding months. meldpunt kinderporno op internet compared with meldpunt cybercrime meldpunt kinderporno op internet is an independent privately run hotline that can be contacted anonymously reports in relating to abusive material involving children and consti tuted a criminal offence of which concerned material hosted on servers in the nether lands . this hotline forms part of the international umbrella network inhope and focuses its activities upon providing information. on the basis of broad categorisation by staff at the emergency service unit intake . please note one re port may consist of information relating to multiple offences. on the other hand it is also possible that different reports may be made in relation to the same offence. those reported in duplicate are in fact only noticed by team beeld en internet the images and internet team back office and not in the intake stage. meldpunt cybercrime does not record cases in sub categories within the child pornography category and for this reason we do not know exactly how many reports within the child pornography category relate to grooming etc. meldpunt cybercrime will record more details in the future however and will re catego rise all reports from onwards in order to create greater insight into the nature of the reports. the provisional analysis showed that of the reports of child pornography from march to march inclusive involve a form of grooming. in of cases actual reports of child pornography involve abusive content featuring children that the police also deem to constitute a criminal offence material suspected to be child pornography by citizens does not always correspond with the definition of child pornography under criminal law. it is also regularly the case that the reported material can no longer be found on the stated internet site . information supplied verbally and in writing by meldpunt cybercrime may and june . for further information about this case see . . . sixty six reports involving child pornography were made in december compared with at least and up to reports of child pornography in the months january to november inclusive. sixty two child pornography related reports were made in january . nb. additional funds are currently being invested in order to raise the profile of meldpunt cybercrime. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur meldpunt cybercrime is a police hotline where reports are viewed and which in principle can not be contacted anonymously reports of child pornography in which mostly related to grooming . the ultimate aim of the reporting centre is to become a generic police hotline that citizens can contact by digital means for all types of reports relating to cybercrime . . . conclusion the identification of child abuse material forms an important part of the tertiary prevention of child pornography. the material can be identified in relation to perpetrators victims or content. identification of perpetrators perpetrators themselves and individuals in their immediate proximity are able to provide or notice in dications of abuse having been committed. to date no attention has been devoted to recognising the potential for abuse to be committed and how to act accordingly. attention must be paid to these aspects. the stop it now project that is to be set up in the netherlands plays an important role in this context. however the hotline combating child pornography on the internet which is involved in launching this project in conjunction with the de waag outpatient forensic centre must ensure that it fulfils this new role the identification of perpetrators but keeps a strict separation between this and its other duties the identification of content and via helpwanted.nl identification of victims . individuals in close proximity to perpetrators can also report indicators that they have noticed to report crime anonymously there is still additional potential for the police to increase the amount of feedback that they provide to report crime anonymously identification of victims victims individuals from their personal environment and professionals who directly come into contact with victims can report or notice indications that children may have been abused. significant steps have already been taken with regard to the identification of victimisation as a result of sexual abuse against children and the subsequent action taken by those in close proximity to victims both in a personal and professional context. it is important that publicity campaigns that have been developed are continued and that they also pay attention to indicators that exist in the digital media. in addition it is expected that the forthcoming domestic violence and child abuse reporting code compulsory use act will be able to ensure that professionals will no longer be lacking in means to take action. the use of a report ing code will result in more frequent intervention in the event of any suspicions. individuals in close proximity to victims both in the personal and professional sphere have many bodies which they can contact and the most obvious ones would be the amks. bnrm conducted an exploratory study that showed that the additional dimension of victimisation as a result of child abuse material is generally not recognised or acknowledged. it is not standard practice for amk staff members to ask questions in relation to child pornography in cases of sexual abuse. no specific care provision is available in relation to this aspect either. staff of amks do not have sufficient knowledge of child pornography and more broadly speaking of the digital indicators of abuse due to shortcomings in training. it is important that more attention is paid to this aspect. victims themselves are able to contact organisations such as kindertelefoon. unfortunately kindertelefoon does not record details of child pornography in cases of sexual abuse against children. a positive development however is that the organisation now actively refers children to youth care agencies. in addition it is now possible for victims to send a report specifically information supplied verbally by meldpunt cybercrime may . http helpwanted.nl implementation in cases of online abuse to helpwanted.nl. victims will also soon be able to use an online reporting button which is currently being developed within the scope of the digivaardig digibewust programme. it is important in this regard that the behind the scenes aspects of the reporting button initiative are well organised. identification of content internet users may also encounter child abuse material on the internet and they can report this content that they have identified to the privately run hotline combating child pornography on the internet and or the cyber crime reporting website run by the police. it is important that abusive content that has been reported is removed by isps as soon as possible. in order to ensure that this happens the agreements between the hotline combating child pornography on the internet and the police must be revised. the british counterpart hotline the internet watch foundation may serve as an example in this regard. it may be possible to consider expanding the remit of the hotline combating child pornography on the internet for example to extend to monitoring and or shutting down forums and networks pos sibly within the scope of the stop it now project see also . . . . detection . . introduction this section will outline the working process in relation to the detection of child abuse material. a description will be given of the organisation that has been put in place within the police force in rela tion to the detection of producers distributors and possessors of child abuse material and the work ing methods of the various police divisions will be explained. the strategy to tackle child pornography involves a number of complicating factors however such as a continuous influx of cases from other countries and the unknown nature of a case before it is investigated does it only involve possession of child abuse material or are there indications that point to production and therefore abuse . such factors make it difficult to assign priority to certain investigations at an early stage. these complicating factors will also be discussed. at the time of writing this report various developments are underway with regard to the way in which detection is organised. first of all the new structure of the future national police force is under develop ment. the police have also collaborated with the public prosecution service om in order to investigate what improvements could be made to the current strategy to tackle child pornography. one of the results of that collaboration was the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography. this section will describe the current working method and will attempt to formulate points for improvement on the basis of that current working method. nevertheless we will also examine the new structure in so far as this is clear at the present time. finally we will indicate which elements will certainly need to be included in the new structure in order to improve the effectiveness of detection activities. . . working method in detection images that constitute child pornography serve an important function in detection after all character istics of perpetrators victims and their surroundings in the images provide important indications that increase the likelihood of detection. if child abuse material is found on a computer this may constitute grounds for a major investigation involving the rescue of victims and the arrest of perpetrators. material not only contains indications for use in detecting offences listed in article b of the dutch criminal http helpwanted.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur code it can also serve as evidence that the abuse actually took place. the provision of evidence can often prove difficult in sexual abuse cases. in accordance with the implementation provisions concerning child pornography the identification of victims and perpetrators of sexual abuse and the production of child abuse material must form the primary focus in the detection of this material and the prosecution in such cases. possession of child abuse material and child erotica may serve as cases with a chance of conviction for potential abuse and production. in practice however it is not possible or scarcely possible to assess the nature of the investigation in the first stage does it involve a distributor producer or a possessor of child abuse material . the nature distribution production or possession of the case under investigation can only be established later on once all data storage media have been read. it is therefore not an easy task to prioritise those investigations that offer the greatest likelihood of identifying victims. the forthcoming sections will describe how the investigative authorities deal with this issue. images and internet team klpd ipol the images and internet team team beeld en internet hereinafter referred to as tbi operated by the klpd ipol acts as an information hub within the entire detection chain. the purpose of the tbi is to identify victims and trace the perpetrators of child pornography. staff in the team manage the national child pornography database investigate reports of child abuse material on the internet and coordinate in formation relating to child pornography and paedosexual offences. the division also has access to various national and international databases which enable data to be combined and investigations to be conducted at national and international level into potential links to other investigations. the unprocessed indicators of child abuse material are received by the tbi in addition to all other indica tors in relation to such material such as a suspect who has committed an act of sexual abuse and is also potentially in possession of child abuse material. cases are received through a total of five points of entry which are as follows a. hundreds of requests for investigation arrive from other countries every year and these also give rise to hundreds of investigations see later in this section . b. the tbi also receives and handles reports of distribution of child abuse material on the internet in the broadest sense of the term. the hotline combating child pornography on the internet also supplies these reports sending more than one thousand reports every year. c. the tbi conducts its own investigations into child abuse images and paedosexual networks. as part van wijk nieuwenhuis . implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code a dutch government gazette december no. . implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code a dutch government gazette december no. . van der zee groeneveld . implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code a dutch government gazette december no. . the hotline combating child pornography on the internet is a privately run initiative. national child pornography expertise centre landelijk expertisecentrum kinderporno public prosecution service and police not publicly available . implementation of these investigations it uses a variety of judicial information sources and images as well as infor mation from regional police forces and investigative authorities in other countries. d. many reports are sent in by the police cyber crime reporting website and these give rise to several dozen investigations annually see also . . . . e. investigations are passed directly to regional sexual offences divisions by means of official reports. these investigations may for example be the result of a report of sexual abuse in which it emerged from a video recorded interview that the perpetrator recorded the sexual abuse. computer repair companies that discover child abuse images on a computer also call in the police. these investiga tions of child abuse material should also be reported to the tbi but this is not always the case. the tbi makes an initial assessment and takes account of the extent to which the case involves an or ganisation the presence of a network the potential magnitude of the case whether or not the images were produced recently and the suspect s online environment. a coordinator from the national child pornography database assesses whether a case does indeed involve child abuse material. if the images are old it is quite likely that the sexual offence the sexual abuse may have become barred by limita tion. in such a case there is little point in launching a criminal investigation into abuse. if images have been produced recently however the investigation is given priority as in such a case it is likely that the victim is still being abused. on the basis of the findings the coordinator draws up what are known as official assessment reports which contain details of the subject matter of the material the identification of victims a statement as to whether the images fulfil the criteria in order to constitute a violation of article b of the dutch criminal code and a determination as to whether the images are known in the national child pornography database. the internet identities and any credit card numbers are recorded. these details make it possible to ascertain whether the individuals concerned have distributed or downloaded child abuse material. a demand for information is then used to derive name and address details from the internet identity or the credit card number. these details enable a suspect to be identified and an official report of this criminal investigation is produced. the images involved are also secured. the report of the technical investigation and the official report pertaining every year these sources give rise to hundreds of investigations by the dutch police regional and supra regional and several thousand investigations in other countries that are transferred to the police services responsible in other countries via interpol and europol. see implementation provisions con cerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code a dutch government gazette december no. . national child pornography expertise centre public prosecution service and police not publicly available . national child pornography expertise centre public prosecution service and police not publicly available . the implementation provisions concerning child pornography state that investigations for informa tion must be submitted to the mainstream regional steering and evaluation team within the police force s jurisdiction. van der zee groeneveld . in many cases a subscription holder was identified who was later found not to be the suspect. informa tion supplied in writing by tbi september . national child pornography expertise centre public prosecution service and police not publicly available . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur to the images are combined and this is sent to the north and east netherlands supraregional crime squad br non desk where the cases are distributed to the relevant parties or if immediate action is required it is sent immediately to the regional unit. the majority of these cases are taken up and dealt with by the regional units. the national child pornography database the national child pornography database is managed by the tbi. a new database was brought into use in may as the old version was no longer adequate. the new database serves as a tool to provide greater efficiency in detection and to prevent any unnecessary duplication of work. its aim is not to show the scale of the child abuse material that has been seized by the police. the new database was supplied empty and input will come from the regional units. three connections were in place in july rotterdam utrecht and twente from which images could be uploaded. images are classified as child pornography child pornography with explanation or other . the first classification concerns images that are undoubtedly child pornography images featuring pre adolescent victims and involving penetrative sex or touching of genitals and the second classification involves other abusive material featuring children and constituting a criminal offence in accordance with the implementation provisions concerning child pornography. when an image is uploaded from a regional unit that does not yet appear in the database the investigator is required to assess the images. this image is then placed in the temporary storage portal of the database. an image is only assigned the relevant classification and included in the database when that image has been assigned the same classification by three different investigators from three different regional units. this ensures that a reliable database is created with material that serves the purpose. at the present time images have been added to the database. in the future the technical means will be available to include video material as well as specific information relating to images such as characteristics and identification of victims and suspects. programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . national child pornography project . information supplied verbally by klpd images and internet team team beeld en internet july . the old database consisted of images without specific information. for example no distinction was made between abusive images involving children and other images. the technical capabilities of this old database were very limited in and consequently it was not possible to link it to other relevant in formation emerging in the future . furthermore input from the regional units into the database was not logical due to the fact that the images had to be delivered manually. the database may contribute towards achieving clarity in relation to the grey area between material that constitutes a criminal offence and that which does not. the distinction between child pornography and child pornography with an explanation is made partly in view of potential legislative changes and international comparisons. in the future there must be no doubt with regard to classification in the child pornography category. a court could then convict an individual on the basis of the fact that an image falls into this category without having to assess the images itself. the fact that an image does not yet appear in the database provides important information. it is po tentially new material involving new victims or material that has not yet been distributed or is longer being distributed. some examples include new labels such as virtual child pornography part of a series grey area etc. implementation the workload of the tbi in particular was placed on the agenda in the korpsmonitor police forces monitor . the tbi expressed its intention to invest more in infiltration undercover purchasing of material and internet investigations the labour intensive means known as bob. see . . . how ever due to the workload the shortage in capacity and the necessity to perform primary duties such as international collaborative activities the tbi hardly ever manages to carry out this intention. regional police forces the regional police forces receive cases for investigation from the north and east netherlands suprar egional crime squad br non . regional units also receive cases from community police officers com puter companies and via their own investigations. in individual cases involving a sexual offence sexual abuse the suspect s computer is seized and after the data on the computer has been read it may emerge that the suspect had had child abuse material in his her possession. this may constitute a reason for further investigation into potential victims or into the suspect s possible participation in a network in which images are exchanged. the seizure of data storage media if an investigation provides reason to do so is incidentally not a standard procedure. the regional police forces conduct criminal investigations of child pornography. practically all police regions have commercial sex offences divisions which are concerned with all sexual offences in which a commercial purpose plays a significant role such as child pornography forced prostitution and traf ficking in human beings. coordinators of child pornography matters have also been appointed in all regions who maintain contact with tbi and the other regions. landelijke proeftuin zambezi the landelijke proeftuin aanpak kinderpornografie national testbed to tackle child pornography known as the zambezi project was set up within the rotterdam rijnmond police force. the team worked closely with the detective agency digitale opsporing and the public prosecution service and developed new working methods and processes that were made available at a national level. the parties also investigated the limitations of legal frameworks and the opportunities to begin new forms of collaborative partnerships with companies and institutions. new software was also de veloped by the netherlands forensic institute nfi in collaboration with the digital working group within the test bed which processes all data seized from suspects on hard drive dvd etc. . the test bed must primarily be regarded as a favourable environment that enables the investigation prosecution and punishment of mala fide individuals involved in child pornography. programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . the monitor contains data for the year and was published in . special investigative powers. since summer this is being given greater priority but at the expense of reports received by the organisation. information supplied in writing by tbi september . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . see implementation provisions concerning the detection and prosecution in relation to sexual abuse a dutch government gazette no. which provide no instructions in relation to seizure of data storage media. programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . wodc . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the team in the test bed also worked on alternative means of settlement under the name do ing nothing is not an option niets doen is geen optie indigo see . . such as mandatory care provision for individuals who view child abuse material. such a case would not immediately give rise to criminal proceedings. not only is the aim to settle these cases more efficiently but to solve them more effectively. this applies to first offenders in particular. mandatory care provision provides an opportunity to dissuade those who possess material from becoming involved with child pornography again thereby limiting the number of criminal cases as a result. this method of working can also have a preventative effect. it is clear he workload is continuously increasing and that according to the authors of the korps monitor the current configuration is inadequate. this has been confirmed once again in the korpsmonitor . experiments such as those performed in the zambezi test bed provide an insight into the future. one effect of the zambezi test bed is that the digital process in rotterdam is sufficiently organised. new digital developments arising from the test bed and the investigation in the digital domain are set to become reality in the very near future. the test bed has since come to an end. there is a great deal of variation amongst the regional police forces and it is therefore not easy to pro vide a description of an average regional force. in some regions the subject is given priority whilst in others hardly any attention is paid to it. the technical facilities likewise vary. no working processes have been developed in relation to child pornography. many regional police forces make some use of standardised working processes. however some regional forces make a contribution towards develop ing standard procedures such as twente having developed an items seizure module and a standard official report and rotterdam having developed a prioritisation model and a standard procedure for investigations in the digital domain . many of the activities are undertaken at the individual investiga tor s discretion. it is also the case that six different structures exist within the regional police forces. some forces such as tijn limburg zuid rotterdam and amsterdam for example have a specialised child pornography team in which sex offence investigators are tasked solely with investigating cases of child pornography . other forces have a centralised sexual offences division at a single site where all sex offence investigators work on cases of child pornography and are supported in this work by police of ficers that specialise in this field haaglanden hollands midden gelderland zuid and kennemerland . it is therefore not possible to produce a clear cut picture of all organisational forms. finally the focus of each regional force s activities varies. five of the regional forces focus upon victim identification. they regard child pornography as a by product of sexual abuse tijn and or intend to put a stop to the offence by tracing the victim amsterdam and removing as many victims from the circuit as possible rotterdam . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . van der zee groeneveld . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . partnership of twente ijsselland noord oost gelderland. implementation the authors of the korpsmonitor concluded in general that in the majority of regions the child pornography investigation process has been configured in such a way as to keep the influx of cases under control. police forces do not examine all the images that are found to check whether they contain indi cations that may possibly lead to a conviction. it is usually sufficient to examine the number of images that is sufficient for the purpose of securing a possible conviction. this method of working limits the likelihood of finding victims and the producers and distributors are not identified. the sex offence investigators are of course not tasked with tackling child pornography alone this area forms only a part of the full range of cases dealt with by a youth and sex offences division. supraregional crime squad teams since the supraregional crime squad teams brts have been tackling serious forms of crime that extend beyond the jurisdiction of a regional police force. the brts take the form of joint partnerships between two or more neighbouring forces. since four brts have been partly run by the br non for two years and have been deployed in the reduction of pending cases of child pornography in conjunc tion with the regional police forces. the reason for this was to settle the dozens of cases known as astral which involved downloaders who had purchased child abuse material using their credit cards. only part of a brt is concerned with tackling child pornography. the regions that form part of the brt seconded three digital domain investigators and two child pornography investigators who continue to work at their place of work within the region. it emerged from the korpsmonitor that the brts have little expertise in relation to sex offence cases and or child pornography cases and that they make use of support from sex offence investigators from the regional police forces in cases of this type. searching for victims does not form part of the proce dure and this has been a conscious policy choice. these teams were allegedly continuing to be deployed until the strategy to tackle child pornography and its focus were organised at a national level in order to change the way in which pending cases are managed. the brts will no longer focus upon tackling child pornography in the future. team high tech crime of klpd nr the team high tech crime thtc of the national crime squad nr which forms part of the national police services agency klpd is involved at a national level in conducting criminal investigations into and implementing measures to tackle high tech crime especially that which is associated with serious organised crime and innovative forms of high tech crime or incidents with a significant international element. the term high tech crime refers to cases under investigation that pose a threat to a vital programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . reports from the coordinators consultation february . see also parliamentary papers ii vi no. p. . minister of security and justice progress report on tackling child pornography march . see www.om.nl onderwerpen verkeer bovenregionale viewed august . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . minister of security and justice progress report on tackling child pornography march . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . van der hulst neve . http www.om.nl onderwerpen verkeer bovenregionale child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur interest national security and economy and or that involve organised crime particularly the more serious forms . the team together with the existing computer forensics team digitale recherche team digitaal internet of the national crime squad has been operational since january . the aim is to conduct two to four major investigations into high tech crime per year. the team acts as a point of contact for partners within the netherlands and in other countries and is available hours per day. the team provides an administrative report if applicable in all major investigations and develops new innovative methods of detection. the klpd periodically informs the minister of security and justice of the results achieved by the team. a multi disciplinary team from the klpd under the management of the team leader of the thtc took part in the investigation in relation to the amsterdam sexual abuse case. the work of the sex offences di vision in amsterdam included analysing the child abuse images found in order to identify the victims and for the purpose of the detection and prosecution of robert m. and his partner. the tbi contributed its knowledge and expertise and seconded some of its staff to the multi disciplinary team. this created an opportunity structure that was tailored to the investigation of the extensive amsterdam sexual abuse case. there were sufficient indications present to suggest that robert m. was maintaining a network with like minded individuals. as a result of this the multi disciplinary team focused primarily upon mapping out the network of robert m it was not so much the child abuse material that formed the starting point but rather the e mail and chatroom traffic. the analysis of the e mail and chatroom traffic was used to reveal the individuals with whom robert m. had contact and what had been exchanged. this method was pre eminently perpetrator orientated. it is not yet definite how the working method of the multi disciplinary team will ultimately be embedded see also . . . child abuse material on anonymous heavily concealed websites in an investigation on the internet the national crime squad found large quantities of child abuse material on anonymous online meeting places and hidden websites. the investigation was con ducted as a result of the emergence of the amsterdam sexual abuse case. the national crime squad of the national police services agency klpd assembled a multi disciplinary investigation team in order to map out the international network of the suspected sex offender robert m. the investigation team consisted of digital technology experts from the national crime squad the specialist criminal investigations applications department dsrt the amsterdam amstelland police force sex offence specialists from the department of international police information and detectives from other klpd services. the internet security firm fox it supplied technical advice infrastructure and assistance to the investigation team. it emerged in this investigation that robert m. used hidden places known as hidden services on the internet. in doing so he used the tor network a worldwide network that enables users to surf the internet anonymously. the hidden services that were investigated consisted of websites forums and other hidden meeting places where child abuse material is exchanged. visitors to these sites also communicated in chat channels about the abuse of children and the production and distribution of child abuse material. under the responsibility of the national public prosecutor s office of the public prosecution service and with van der hulst neve . parliamentary papers ii and no. . information supplied verbally by the team leader of the high tech crime unit klpd july . implementation the permission of the examining judge at the court of rotterdam the detectives entered twelve hidden services by breaking through the security facility. a total of more than images and videos of child abuse were found in the investigation. the most important aim in tackling child pornography is to find and put a stop to the abuse of children and to arrest the producers of the images or videos. in this investigation the police wanted to make it clear that neither anonymity within the tor network nor boundaries between counties will constitute any hindrance to the de tection of child abuse material. international investigations europol and interpol due to its distribution via the internet child abuse material often exists on an international scale and the commercial production of such material often involves a form of organised crime. for this reason criminal investigations are usually conducted on an international scale. interpol and europol fa cilitate and coordinate international investigations into networks and therefore play a role in tackling child pornography. at interpol a specific team is charged with international coordination activities and specialist meet ings are frequently organised in which information and knowledge is exchanged. in interpol began building a database of images from solved cases. this database is used to identify children who are or have been victims of sexual abuse and child pornography. the tbi receives a great deal of in formation via interpol in relation to cases found regarding child pornography that is connected to the netherlands. at europol tackling child pornography forms the subject of one of the current analytical work files awf . national police services across practically the entire world are involved in tackling child pornog raphy in the same way as tbi. just as is the case in the netherlands cases are brought against suspects in those countries by other countries. the case details are sent to those countries via the appropriate chan nels. if investigations uncover international networks this may result in europe wide proceedings by europol or sometimes worldwide by interpol and or europol . international meetings are convened in which information is exchanged and agreements are reached with regard to joint courses of action. the tbi attends such meetings and coordinates cooperative action in close consultation with the national public prosecutor s office and the regional police forces involved. however the korpsmonitor stated that cooperation with international partners is limited. the services of interpol europol and www.om.nl actueel o nieuws persberichten kinderporno anonieme viewed september . van der zee groeneveld . van der zee groeneveld . van der zee groeneveld . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . van der zee groeneveld . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . this is contradicted by a member of staff of tbi. tbi often works in collaboration with partners in other countries such as interpol and europol on an almost daily basis. it is not always clear whether this is the case as far as the regional police forces are concerned. information supplied in writing by tbi september . http www.om.nl actueel o nieuws persberichten kinderporno anonieme child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur eurojust are used occasionally. with respect to international investigations information is exchanged now and then with police organisations in other countries. the international child sexual exploitation icse image database in march the interpol child abuse image database icaid was replaced after eight years of use by the interpol international child sexual exploitation icse image database. the icse image database is a tool that prevents work being carried out in duplicate and serves to identify victims and perpetrators. member states supply the material for the database. this data concerns material in which the perpetrators and or victims have already been identified or material which the country in question tbi in the case of the netherlands regards as important for example if a case is international in nature. material that matches the following description is included in the database . material or any image or movie or other media which forms part of a series which is in contravention of the definition as set out in article of the council of europe convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse .any material that visually depicts a child engaged in real or simulated sexually explicit conduct or any depiction of a child s sexual organs for primarily sexual purposes. . any other material which in the opinion of the member state or investigator it is necessary to place in the database. statistics relating to the extent of the material in the database is not available. not all of the material matches the description of child pornography offences in the various countries. video material that has been broken up into many separate images is also included in the database and this creates a distorted picture. however information is being provided in relation to the number of identified victims and perpetrators since the creation of the icaid in . the state of affairs on august was as follows identified victims from countries of which are from the netherlands and identified perpetrators from countries of which are from the netherlands . royal military constabulary kmar the royal military constabulary schiphol district has a commercial sex offences unit which deals with tackling child pornography. the emphasis within this unit with regard to the detection of child abuse eurojust factsheet www.eurojust.europa.eu childprotect cases.pdf viewed june . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . information supplied in writing by interpol july interpol interpol information sup plied verbally by tbi july . in view of the fact that text for example could be covered by this definition the description is likely to be adapted. the eu has made funding available in order to develop the database to enable video material to be stored in video format in the future for example. the netherlands is ranked as the eighth most common country of origin after the united states of america canada germany sweden norway the united kingdom and france . these victims with dutch nationality were not involved in the amsterdam sexual abuse case. these case details have not yet been passed on to interpol information supplied in writing september . the netherlands is ranked as the fifth most common country of origin after the united states of amer ica canada germany and france . implementation material by kmar schiphol is placed upon dealing with common incidents as well as implementing a pro active approach that forms part of the kids action weeks in the context of child sex tourism. kids action days are held at amsterdam airport schiphol on a fairly regular basis. kids serves to recognise and tackle child pornography couriers and child sex tourism by means of multi disciplinary collaborative efforts at schiphol. the kids strategy involves close cooperation between schiphol customs and tbi of ipol with various units from kmar namely border control computer forensics child pornography assessment team and the youth and sex offences team. during the kids action days passengers arriving directly from countries known for a child sex tourism industry and or countries where child abuse material is produced are subject to additional checks by the collaborating authorities. the royal military constabulary at amsterdam airport schiphol made three arrests in primarily due to the possession importation carrying in transit or export of child abuse material. for example a year old irishman was caught with child abuse material in january . the man arrived on a flight from bangkok. dvds and cds con taining child abuse videos and images were found in his hand luggage as well as children s lingerie. so far we have described the various divisions of the police force that are involved in tackling child por nography. however a number of complications also exist in the work carried out by the police which will be explained in more detail. . . complications the strategy to tackle child pornography is subject to several complications that have more or less emerged over the previous sections. the focus in criminal investigations the number of pending cases prioritisation of investigations and issues in detection all form bottlenecks. on the basis of the aim to find and rescue victims efficacy specifically the extent to which that aim is achieved is low as a result of these bottlenecks. focus in practice downloaders form the focus of detection activities which is at the expense of attention to perpetrators of child abuse producers and commercial distributors but also at the expense of attention for the victim. the korpsmonitor kinderporno examined the focus in each regional police force. five of the twenty five regional forces focus upon victim identification as we described earlier. they regard child pornography as by product of sexual abuse tijn and or intend to put a stop to the offence by tracing the victim amsterdam and remove as many victims as possible from the circuit rotterdam . the victim is placed at the centre of activities which translates into the approach and chosen course of action in detection activities. the research by moran one option could be to apply the findings of research conducted by moran. the study by moran see . . showed that perpetrators of high tech crime are found within the group of perpetra programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . op jacht naar kinderporno on the trail of child pornography de pers january . the amsterdam sexual abuse case forms an exception to this. national child pornography project . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur tors of child pornography and that it is precisely within this group of perpetrators that material produced relatively recently is exchanged. this finding can form the basis of investigation the approach and the activities must primarily focus upon the perpetrators of high tech crime and less upon simple downloaders. the police and the public prosecution service are working on shifting the focus in tackling these crimes from the viewers and possessors of images of child sexual abuse downloaders to the victims and to the prosecution and detection of producers and distributors. that is easier said than done however. first of all this approach requires more capacity. a criminal investigation focusing on the abuse will take approximately four times longer than an investigation of a downloader. the computer specialists need to analyse the images far more closely when focusing on the abuse aspects. this creates a problem if capacity remains at the same level. pending cases the police and the public prosecution service are also faced with the scale of pending cases. this is the total of all cases that are being handled plus the number of cases that are not yet being handled counted from the time of receipt. at the end of the third quarter of there were pending cases. at the end of the fourth quarter of this fell to cases. this fall can suddenly be reversed as a result of an influx of new investigations from other countries. the korpsmonitor showed that the average number of pending cases each year is approximately . the pending cases are mainly made up of investigations initiated in other countries. between and cases are received annually and the financial coalition against child pornography in the usa forms the source of a large number of cases as credit card companies supply information in relation to potential downloaders of child abuse material. in the third quarter of requests for legal assistance were received from other countries. it is generally expected that the number of cases from other countries will increase. moran . minister of security and justice progress report on tackling child pornography march . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . minister of security and justice progress report on tackling child pornography march . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . appendix b p. . information supplied verbally by ipol april . the financial coalition against child pornography is an international association created by banks credit card companies and internet companies who have taken up the fight against producers and their clients on the internet. parliamentary papers ii vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . this is not the experience of tbi. they occasionally re ceive investigations in which credit card details emerge. the most recent investigations date back more than two years astral . commercial child abuse material for that matter only accounts for a small part of the total number of cases. information supplied in writing by tbi september . implementation the possible reason for the workload is the fact that not all cases can be dealt with. in the view of the authors of the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography the existence of the pending cases is primarily a consequence of a shortage of capacity. they argue that with the current resources it is possible to handle around investigations focusing on possession of material constituting a criminal offence. this means that an average of to cases are left unopened every year. on average . of the total police capacity is used in tackling sex offence cases including child pornogra phy. the twente and gelderland midden regional police forces deploy the highest capacity at . . prioritisation evaluation and steering activities are prioritised at the beginning of the investigation as well as investigations that originate from other countries upon intake or when a report arrives. prioritisation is determined by means of structured consultations with the public prosecutor ovj the liaison officer for victims of sexual abuse zao and or via a case consultation. the case list is sent fairly frequently to the public prosecu tion service usually in addition to the case consultation. investigations within the regional police force must be supplied for information purposes to the mainstream regional steering and evaluation team as a minimum requirement. the usual bottlenecks occur during prioritisation evaluation and steering. it is not easy to prioritise activities in the investigations as in most cases it is only possible to ascertain that a specific internet identity is involved in the uploading or downloading of images and it is not possible to determine whether the suspect could be a producer or is only in possession of material. the focus of the investiga tion is unknown a priori. it remains a complex task during the course of the investigation as well to distinguish between possessors and producers. a prioritisation model is necessary in the investigation that can be used to weigh up factors as early as possible in the detection process. tools are also neces sary in order to ensure objectivity in doing so. these tools are not yet widely available but they must be developed further . a prioritisation model has already been used on an experimental basis in the zambezi test bed that was recently rounded off . . . a variety of models are used by the regions for the purpose of prioritisation and setting criteria. the weight assigned to criteria usually depends upon the viewpoint of the detective handling the case. the national child pornography project . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . the authors also reported that no exact figure can be provided for the capacity that has been made available for tackling child pornography due to the considerable diversity and differences amongst organisational forms that sex offence divisions take. implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code a dutch government gazette december no. . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code a dutch government gazette december no. . national child pornography expertise centre public prosecution service and police not publicly available . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography business case for tackling child pornography. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur choices in this regard seem to be arbitrary. in addition cases are almost never handled by evaluation and steering teams this only happens in a large scale investigation in cases of anxiety in society in the case of a particular suspect or as soon as a case workload exceeds the available working capacity. guidance is hardly ever given. as a rule cases of child pornography are taken into account in prioritising sex offence cases except in those regions that have organised child pornography investigation activities in separate divisions rotterdam amsterdam limburg zuid tijn . as far as all other regions are concerned this means that child pornography cases are not weighed up against one another but also in comparison with other sex offence cases. it is therefore sometimes the case that certain child pornography cases are categorised as less important than cases such as rape. the following bottlenecks exist in prioritisation it is unclear a priori what the nature of the case is which consequently makes it difficult to prioritise cases the tools are unavailable or weighting is assigned arbitrarily child pornography cases lose out to other sex offence cases and the regional police forces try to keep the workflow at a manageable level. the reason for this primarily lies in the specific nature of child pornography cases what the police ultimately find out possession or production is unknown from the start. bottlenecks in detection one of the bottlenecks in detection is a shortage of time. there is insufficient capacity to be able to carry out all tasks and consequently this adversely affects the use of labour intensive special investigative powers. the tbi for example wishes to invest more in proactive investigation on the internet such as infiltration and undercover purchasing. a further bottleneck in detection is the lack of means to infiltrate networks in which recently produced images are exchanged. it is suspected that the most severe forms of abuse take place within these net works. in order to gain access to such networks a person is required to supply new material. the police would like to infiltrate such networks but they are restricted. first of all such networks are protected by digital security measures with passwords which makes it difficult to gain access. secondly the nature of the images that are exchanged is not clear and there must be a reasonable suspicion in order to infiltrate a network. thirdly the police does not want to exchange any material in order to infiltrate a network after all this means that victims who are recorded in images will be brought into circulation again. it is possible that the police will not find and or seize all the child abuse material related to a case. such material is not always found in the possession of a suspect in view of the fact that these images can be protected by means of encryption stored on the internet file hosting or online file storage or hid den in the house or an individual may use a pre paid mobile internet service which enables him her to remain anonymous. in addition not all data storage media are seized and this very much depends on programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . presentation by a staff member of tbi may . presentation by a staff member of tbi may . implementation whether the police take action on the grounds of article of the dutch code of criminal procedure or article of the dutch code of criminal procedure. all manner of investigation activities may be employed in a search carried out pursuant to article of the dutch code of criminal procedure for example taking photographs in the dwelling. thor ough searches for indicators may also be carried out to support the investigation. this article there fore offers more possibilities than article of the dutch code of criminal procedure. however it is sometimes difficult to obtain permission from the examining judge for a search on the grounds of article of the dutch code of criminal procedure particularly if it concerns older cases. in some regions the means offered by article are therefore chosen. in that case the main occupant is ordered to surrender the data storage medium. the main occupant must then be prepared to lend his her cooperation and comply with the demand. other search activities are not possible in that case however. if the suspect refuses to cooperate the activities at the scene are halted and the examining judge may yet be called in. this situation hardly ever occurs according to the regional police forces such as utrecht . the advantages of invoking article of the dutch code of criminal procedure are first of all that this option is less labour intensive and therefore places less of a burden upon capacity. nevertheless although the investigation is less thorough evidence can still be gathered the victim s identity can be searched for and interventions can be taken in relation to the perpetrator. the experiences of the investigating officers involved has taught us that in most cases when faced with a demand pursuant to article of the dutch criminal code suspects lend their cooperation and also make a statement. a possible disadvantage of action taken pursuant to article is that particularly where a large team is involved in the action the degree to which the main occupant freely lends his his cooperation is open to question. efficacy of detection during the investigation the process of detection should focus on the identification of the victims and the perpetrators of sexual abuse and the production of child abuse material. the extent to which these aims are achieved can be deduced from the number of victims that have been traced. the national child pornography monitor showed that the regional police forces processed cases in . a little more than victims of sexual abuse and of the production of child abuse material were in the event that it is suspected that a criminal offence described in article b of the dutch crimi nal code has been committed there are two types of powers available to the police and the public prosecution service that may result in the seizure of items such as data storage media. a search can be carried out in a dwelling under the guidance of an examining judge pursuant to article of the dutch code of criminal procedure article can be invoked in urgent cases . in addition in the event of a criminal offence as described in article b of the dutch criminal code article of the dutch code of criminal procedure provides the officers stated in article of the dutch code of criminal procedure with powers to demand the surrender of items for seizure and to proceed to seize all items capable of storing data implementation of provisions concerning child pornography paragraph . . many regional police forces invoke multiple legal grounds for seizure of items whereby they act in accordance with the case in question as has been shown in the korpsmonitor p. . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography p. . information supplied verbally by the national public prosecutor in relation to child pornography. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur traced in total in those criminal investigations. the number of victims was not stated in the most recent monitor for . it has emerged that the victims of child pornography who had been identified were in approximately half of the cases chance findings which were discovered on the basis of a report of sexual abuse. the victim stated in that case that recordings had been made of the abuse or that the suspect appeared in the images. a small number of identifications were the result of investigation work carried out on the internet in the meantime. many victims were identified further to the amsterdam sexual abuse case but this case was of exceptional scale and unprecedented in nature so it cannot be representative of the number of victims identified via the internet. we may therefore have cause to ques tion the efficacy of the detection of victims via the internet. the aforementioned complications are partly acknowledged by the police and the public prosecution service and it is partly for that reason that the minister of security and justice has announced a new structure in relation to the strategy to tackle child pornography. the outlines of that new structure are described below and the new structure should resolve the aforementioned complications. . . the new structure in the spring of the minister of security and justice sent a letter to the house in which the new structure to tackle child pornography was presented. in the short term a national child pornography steering team made up of representatives from the public prosecution service and the police will be created which will weigh up and prioritise the centrally prepared investigations and then assign them to the units that carry out the investigations. the investigations will not be assessed further at regional level. the focus as well as the monitoring activities will be maintained by the national steering team. a jointly run police and public prosecution service child pornography and child sex tourism expertise hub will also be created which will focus on building and strengthening networks of experts within the police and public prosecution service. a national team to tackle child pornography will be created its tasks will include information coordination intelligence and detection duties including making contributions in international cases . the national steering team assigns cases to the regional units. the focus is firmly placed upon perpetrators in the netherlands and the detection of victims of abuse. this new structure was described in greater detail in the report kinderporno aangepakt child pornography tackled of the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography in early june . this report contains a proposal for the creation of the organisation to tackle the issue at a national level and forms part of the documentation that was provided to the lower house by the minister of security and justice. the new strategy to tackle child pornography consists of two primary lines of action one geared towards tackling actual abuse specifically a task for the regional police force. one geared towards tackling the recording of abuse the child abuse material specifically at national level. a national unit will focus upon tackling child pornography using tactical and technical expertise. that particular unit will take the form of a centrally managed organisation consisting of a single national unit and ten decentralised units. an independent division will concentrate exclusively upon the management national child pornography expertise centre public prosecution service and the police not publicly available . parliamentary papers ii . vi no. . implementation and undertaking of four expertise based roles innovation communication coordination informa tion the overall management of the entire workflow facilitating prioritisation at national level evalua tion and steering activities complying with all quality control measures and monitoring. the processing of material will be organised at a central national level. the national division concentrates its activities on the processing of child abuse material and provides support to the regional units in handling cases involving downloaded material. the regional police forces decentralised units will concentrate on tackling the abuse of children and the identification of victims tackling the production distribution and possession of child abuse material and undertaking a more in depth investigation into suspects. the investigations of child sexual abuse and child pornography will be conducted jointly with the sex offence investigation team and using the expertise of the future regional units in the digital domain. with this approach regional cases are tackled first at a regional level with a view to shifting the focus to rescuing victims although monitoring will also take place at a national level at the same time. the work process that aims to tackle the production of child abuse material is carried out at a regional level as much as possible. the regional force must link the investigation of cases of sexual abuse and cases of child pornography. the concept that child pornography constitutes an associated offence and offers evidence in cases of abuse forms a crucial starting point in this regard. the regional child pornography teams will operate in conjunction with investigations of abuse already underway and will seize the data storage media if possible. the strategy to tackle child pornography uses a nationally applicable model in prioritising evaluating and managing cases at both national and regional level. the model serves as a basis for the policy that is determined by the portfolio holder for sex offences within the board of police chief constables and the board of procurator generals which both form part of the national steering and evaluation teams. as part of this other means of settling cases are also considered. teams of staff members with different capacities are being created which is the aim. what is needed in order to achieve this is tactical capacity staff that specialise in the field of sex offences and digital expertise as well as general management and administrative resources. . . conclusion prioritisation in general we can conclude that the majority of the regional police forces and the brts focus their activities on the processing of investigations without carrying out a more detailed investigation into the abuse. the tbi prioritises its work in conjunction with the national coordinating public prosecutor in child pornography cases but this prioritisation has neither been standardised nor described. the there should also be capacity to do this at a regional level. programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . kinderporno aangepakt. de organisatie van de aanpak van kinderporno bij de politie child pornography tackled. the organisation of the strategy used by the police to tackle child pornography . improvements in tackling child pornography . kinderporno aangepakt. de organisatie van de aanpak van kinderporno bij de politie. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur activities in relation to tackling child pornography that are carried out by the multi disciplinary team of the klpd under the management of the team leader from the thtc are temporary in nature and are primarily focused upon perpetrators which has added a further dimension to the entire work process. focus child abuse material in the hands of the police is proof that sexual abuse has taken place. the focus in the criminal investigation must still be upon victim identification however. that is also the case in theory but practice has shown that this approach is successful in only a few cases. the police have little information a priori in relation to a potential perpetrator and it is often nothing more than an internet identity. the information that they obtain is only an ip address at which activities connected with child pornography take place. it is not known whether a victim s is are involved at this point. however the police are confronted with hundreds of proposals for investigation every year. it is consequently difficult to achieve the shift in focus from tackling possessors to actually tackling the producers. as a result of this difficulty searching for victims of sexual violence via the internet is not very effective. conversely every victim who is found means that the effort expended is justified and the new structure may perhaps offer a solution. method of working and organisation a number of possible suggestions could provide a solution to the aforementioned bottlenecks. first of all the new structure should certainly combine sex offence specialisms with digital and tactical expertise. the use of additional capacity is essential in this regard. the minister of security and justice has announced that additional capacity will be made available to tackle child pornography. the way in which this capacity is to be divided up must be taken into account. the pooling of expertise and competencies could also im prove efficacy. the multi disciplinary team of the klpd under the management of the team leader from the thtc used a perpetrator orientated approach analysis of e mail and chatroom traffic of perpetrators and the tbi employed a primarily victim orientated policy mostly analysis of the images . perpetrator and victim orientated detection activities should be combined at a single site in which the competencies in the digital domain should be merged with sex offence specialisms. perpetrator networks must be fully investi gated as part of which the children appearing in images of sexual abuse must also be taken into account. seizure of data storage media secondly parties must seek alignment with cases of sexual abuse in which data storage media must always be seized. after all seeking to identify victims via the internet is not always effective and it frequently occurs by chance. the implementation provisions concerning child pornography now state that when forms of sexual violence against children are reported the possibility that child abuse material may have been produced must be taken into account at all stages of the investigation and a search must be carried out if possible. although an appendix of the current implementation provisions concerning public decency however the investigation of the amsterdam sexual abuse case began with found images and gave rise to new investigations into abuse that actually did take place. parliamentary papers ii no. . tbi also carries out investigations of perpetrators on the internet. in the s it was also recommended that when the police encountered a case of sexual abuse involving children they should be prepared for the possibility that child abuse material had been produced and that they were required to conduct a search of the dwelling at the earliest possible stage see . and . . . appendix content of an informative interview. implementation offences refer to digital data storage media within the context of an informative interview no reference is made to seizure. by emphasising the importance of seizure of data storage media in both the implemen tation provisions concerning child pornography and the implementation provisions concerning public de cency offences the efficacy of detection can be improved and the focus can actually be shifted to the abuse. thirdly more information regarding the efficacy of detection needs to be collected. for example the number of victims that were found via the internet is practically unknown. for that reason details of victims must be recorded. as a result we will have greater insight into the efficacy of detection which may have implications for the policy to be implemented. pending cases the current number of pending cases forms a burden for the police and the judicial authorities. the pro posed new structure does not yet offer any insight into the way in which the pending cases could be worked through except for the alternative means of settling cases. no analysis of the nature of the pend ing cases is available and consequently it is almost impossible to draft a policy. the minimal capacity avail able has also been designated as a cause for the pending cases. this is the issue however as the number of pending cases should increase if to cases are received every year. this is not happening though as although the number of pending cases cannot be controlled it is nevertheless relatively stable and even decreases now and then. an investigation of the inflow and outflow of the pending cases could provide an insight into this situation. the existence of pending cases may potentially be the result of the low priority that is assigned to child pornography cases the working method being used or the influx of investigations from other countries. the assumption that a shortage in capacity forms the cause of the pending cases is partly unfounded. a potential solution could be to develop an international prioritisation model. to this end the possibilities for making international agreements in this regard could be explored further. . prosecution and trial in this section we will firstly discuss the prosecution of child pornography offences and the subsequent trials. sentences and orders are the subject of . . whereby we must take into account that in terms of the sentence carried article b of the dutch criminal code does not distinguish between different forms of conduct such as the possession distribution or production of child pornography. a separate section is then devoted to statistics regarding prosecutions decisions not to prosecute sentences and convictions. in addition to this we will also address the characteristics of suspects and convicted perpe trators. finally this section will set out a number of trends that can be ascertained from the statistics. . . prosecution for the detection and prosecution of child pornography offences the implementation provisions concerning child pornography govern all actions undertaken by the police and the public prosecution dutch government gazette no. . the korpsmonitor states the following one area for attention with regard to registration and moni toring concerns rescued and or identified victims. in order to record these numbers more effectively it is important that an unequivocal definition of the types of victims is provided. the question remains as to the extent to which this is applies with regard to old cases. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur service. in addition the implementation provisions concerning the detection and prosecution in relation to sexual abuse implementation provisions concerning public decency offences also play a significant role. the latter implementation provisions contain policy rules with regard to the detection and prosecution of sexual abuse in general and sexual abuse within dependency relationships as well as policy rules regarding the treatment of people who report sexual offences. the previous imple mentation provisions concerning child pornography of which were in force until the end of placed a greater emphasis on pre adolescent pornography child pornography involving violence child pornography involving an obvious dependency relationship and the large scale distribution and com mercial production of post adolescent child pornography. the latest implementation provisions which came into effect on january no longer make this distinction. the distinction between children and adolescents has been deliberately removed from the new implementation provisions because the impact of child abuse is high for children of all ages. the national coordinating public prosecutor in child pornography cases states that the number of cases in which adolescents are involved is increasing in part due to the introduction of webcams and mobile telephones. in the current implementation provisions a number of assessment criteria are discussed extensively in order to be able to determine whether any given material constitutes a criminal offence as referred to in article b of the dutch criminal code. the new implementation provisions concerning child pornography do state that in the detection and prosecution of child pornography offences the primary focus should be on implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code a dutch government gazette december no. . the implementation provisions concerning the detection and prosecution in relation to sexual abuse a dutch government gazette no. contain regulations that apply mutatis mutandis to child pornography cases unless stated otherwise in the implementation provisions concerning child pornography. the care of victims is the subject of a separate paragraph in the implementation provisions concerning public decency offences in which reference is made to the implementation provisions concerning the care of victims a dutch government gazette no. . public prosecution service available at www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertisecentrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx viewed june . see also . . . sexting involves the sharing of sexually explicit images by means of electronic technology mobile telephone internet see . . . the implementation provisions concerning child pornography do not include an implementation provision with regard to the phenomenon of sexting. nevertheless in view of the growth in the extent of this phenomenon this deserves consideration see also weesepoel . the latest implementation provisions also differ from the previous implementation provisions on a number of other points. this is related to the fact that the legislation regarding the approach to wards combating child pornography has been adjusted several times over the past years in terms of the sentence carried and has been extended as a result of new legislation regarding the criminalisa tion of grooming. abusive images involving children are distributed primarily via the internet. the implementation provisions therefore also place a great emphasis on the handling of seized material implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code dutch government gazette december no. . furthermore it is striking that the implemen tation provisions concerning public decency offences do not make reference to the seizing of data stor age media or material whereas it is precisely in cases of sexual abuse that this can provide important indications which may increase the likelihood of detection. http www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertisecentrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx implementation the victims the perpetrators of sexual abuse and the production of abusive images involving children. possession of child pornography and child erotica can serve as an indication that can be used to detect possible abuse and production. with regard to priorities the implementation provisions report that this plays an important part in identifying the victims and that it is difficult to estimate the severity of an investigation into child pornography in its initial stages see . . . a child pornography expertise centre has been established within the public prosecution service this centre is under the direction of the national coordinating public prosecutor in child pornogra phy cases. the expertise centre is administered by the rotterdam district public prosecutor s office. in addition to this centre there also exists a victims of sexual abuse liaison officers platform chaired by the deputy chief public prosecutor of the rotterdam district public prosecutor s office who is also chair of the sexual abuse committee. the way in which child pornography is tackled forms part of this committee. the child pornography portfolio is not held at the national public prosecutor s office. at the college of procurators general the sexual abuse and child pornog raphy portfolios are assigned to different procurators general. alternative methods of settlement the government and the house of representatives are in agreement that by shifting the focus towards individuals suspected of the sexual abuse of children and towards the production and distribution of abusive material involving children attention must still be given to cases involving downloaded mate rial that involve the possession of or the gaining of access to child abuse material. the minister for security and justice hereby states that other methods of dealing with the problem must be employed for this including extrajudicial methods. investigations into child abuse material remain complex and time consuming. before a case comes up for a hearing the public prosecution service also has opportunities to settle the case itself. on the basis of the public prosecution service settlement act the public prosecution service is able to issue a punishment order which contains orders with which the convicted perpetrator must comply. if behavioural orders are also issued with the punish ment order the probationary period can be a maximum of one year. out of court settlements also implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code dutch government gazette december no. p. . the involvement of the high tech crime unit of the national public prosecutor s office in the current investigation into the amsterdam sexual abuse case by the team high tech crime of the national crime squad forms an exception to this. letter from the minister for security and justice of june parliamentary papers ii vi no. . according to the public prosecution service the number of cases reported to the police has increased on a yearly basis public prosecution service available at www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertise centrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx viewed june . cf. . . . in the progress report of march the minister indicates that the total number of pending cases stabilises each year at around cases with two peaks above this. first pro gress report on the tackling of child pornography parliamentary papers ii vi no. . the public prosecution service settlement act dutch bulletin of acts and decrees entered into force on february . article a paragraph e of the dutch code of criminal procedure. http www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertise ad centrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx http www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertise ad centrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur occur. in addition to this the public prosecution service also has the opportunity to postpone the decision as to whether prosecution will have to take place for a certain amount of time subject to a number of set conditions a conditional decision not to prosecute. this route of conditionally not prosecuting also provides the public prosecution service with opportunities to settle cases. the child pornography expertise centre is therefore seeking new methods of dealing with as many cases as pos sible by means of the niets doen is geen optie indigo doing nothing is not an option initiative. the intention behind this is to allow sufficient time and attention for complex and serious cases without allowing suspects of relatively light cases to end up receiving minimal attention. for these cases which involve the possession of and the gaining of access to child abuse material alternatives to prosecution are then sought. the project such as the one taking place in rotterdam still needs to be evaluated. alongside this a barrier model is currently being developed in order to be able to intervene at the front end of the problem and thus to prevent possible child pornography offences. see . . . a plan for the public prosecution service with regard to combating child pornography is expected to be established after the summer partly in light of recent police developments see . . . the public prosecution service the ministry of security and justice the police and other partners in the chain have expressed the intention to increase the effectiveness of their efforts to combat child pornography. for this purpose joint frameworks for a new plan of action have been formulated. this will have conse quences for the police with regard to its structure and it will in any case have consequences for the public prosecution service with regard to the way in which operation prioritisation and prosecution of child pornography cases are implemented. whilst maintaining the role and responsibility of each party the public prosecution service and police both formulate a plan of action aimed at achieving uniformity using different forms of settlement pooling the knowledge held by the police and public prosecution service in a joint expertise centre and investing in innovation and research. the implementation of this plan is taking place in close collaboration with the partners in the chain. the plan of action for the public prosecution service is expected to be completed after the summer of . . . trial each year between and criminal cases are settled at court in which cases charges are made on the basis of article b of the dutch criminal code some of which occur alongside other offences. in principal child pornography cases are in the first instance settled by all courts. in the cyber crime centre of excellence was set up at the court of appeal in the hague which not only maintains article of the dutch criminal code. see . . . indigo forms part of the zambezi testbed . see . . . public prosecution service available at www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertisecentrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx viewed june child pornography tackled appendix to the letter from the minister for security and justice of june parliamentary papers ii vi no. . written information from the secretary of the project reinforcing the measures to tackle of child por nography at the public prosecution service july . according to the council for the judiciary the courts handled more than cases in in which a charge was made exclusively for child pornography on the basis of article b of the dutch criminal code see www.rechtspraak.nl recht in nederland themadossiers kinderporno pages veelgestelde vragen.aspx viewed june . http www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertisecentrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx http www.rechtspraak.nl recht in nederland themadossiers kinderporno pages veelgestelde vragen.aspx implementation an internal case law database with regard to child pornography cases but also serves as a helpdesk for courts in the rest of the country. in criminal cases related to child pornography images are not included in the dossier as standard as the public prosecution service wants to minimise the risk of the material being further distributed. instead of including images in the dossier the police describe what is depicted on the material in an official report and explain why the material constitutes a child pornography offence. the sample images in principle a maximum of that have been selected are made available to the public prosecutor in a form that is to be decided on in consultation with the public prosecutor who treats them as documen tary evidence and who is able to show these to the members of the session prior to the session or during the session if necessary. these exhibits are not added to the dossier and the public prosecutor regains possession of them after the session. a new method of describing images in an official report and a standard form of indictment are currently being implemented. the aim of these measures is to enable an entire collection to be described in a more effective manner. victims in criminal proceedings images of victims will remain in circulation on the internet and for this reason the possibility of link ing a name with an image must be prevented as much as possible. for victims of child pornography anonymity is always of great importance and therefore the identity and personal details of victims need to be protected as much as possible. the knowledge centre consists of two justices and a secretary and a number of external experts includ ing scientists provide support. implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code dutch government gazette december no. p. . see for example court of rotterdam march national case law number bp on behalf of the suspect it has been put forward that the summons is partly invalid because it is insufficiently factual with regard to this point. it is suggested that the description of sexual behaviours is too general. however according to the court s judgment the factual content of the photos and films is described in sufficient detail. it s almost impossible to describe the content any more explicitly. . no research has been carried out in the netherlands as to the extent to which the sentences imposed for child pornography by judges who see the images themselves differs from judges who do not see the images see www.rechtspraak.nl recht in nederland themadossiers kinderporno pages default.aspx viewed april . . . contains information about victims of child pornography and . contains information regard ing the provision of care to victims. in response to the proposal of the european commission for a new directive on combating sexual abuse the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography the european parliament has tabled an amendment that entails that eu member states are required to guarantee the right to the protection of the privacy and images of underage victims and to prevent the public distribution of information about them that is able to lead to their identification because children must be protected against any type of infringement of their privacy draft european parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the european parliament and of the council on combating sexual abuse sexual exploitation of children and child pornography repealing framework decision jha committee on civil lib erties justice and home affairs rapporteur roberta angelilli cod january p. . http www.rechtspraak.nl recht in nederland themadossiers kinderporno pages default.aspx child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the amsterdam sexual abuse case surrounding robert m. is a recent example of the above mentioned problem. in the dutch newspaper trouw amongst others the lawyer of parents of a number of victims explained that many parents regret having reported the offences. regardless of the cost parents want to keep their children s names out of the media and out of the case notes relating to criminal proceedings in order to ensure that this won t follow them around for the rest of their lives. although the public prosecution service has recognised this problem in practice it remains difficult to ensure that the images remain anonymous. in the first instance the public prosecution service indicated that it was worried that it would offend the victim s parents if their child was reduced to a number. however in the end the decision was made to give the images numbers as an attempt to maintain the anonymity of victims in the criminal proceedings. at the moment however there is no statutory or other provision to guarantee the complete anonym ity of victims in criminal proceedings in situations such as this and as such to protect the identity and personal details of victims. the way in which this can be achieved without this being in conflict with article of the european convention of human rights must be investigated. furthermore parents or carers can face the dilemma of whether or not to tell the child concerned about what happened to them. during the substantive hearing of the criminal case victims of serious crimes are able to make a state ment regarding the consequences that they have suffered as a result of the offences. in the amsterdam sexual abuse case discussion arose as to whether parents of underage victims are able to exercise this right to speak on behalf of their children in the criminal case. exercising the right to speak depends on the age of the victim. only children over the age of twelve are able to exercise this right themselves and children younger than twelve cannot make use of this right. since july the state secretary for spreekrecht kan na kindermisbruik helend werken after child abuse the right to speak can be healing trouw june pp. . ibidem. for this a link can be sought with article of the eu council framework decision no. jha of march on the status of the victim in criminal proceedings pb eg l . this provision concerns protection of privacy of victims. all member states take the protection of victims from pub licity and possible threats and intimidation by the perpetrator very seriously and they usually provide various types of protection lauwaert p. . in may the european commission submitted a motion for a directive concerning minimum standards for victims of crime proposal for a directive of the european parliament and of the council establishing minimum standards on the rights support and protection of victims of crime com final to replace the current framework decision. this proposal includes a pro vision regarding the protection of privacy whereby a best efforts obligation is established in order to ensure that judicial authorities are able to take measures during a hearing to safeguard the privacy and images of victims and their families. in addition to this the member states must encourage national media to take self regulatory measures as a result of which they too will protect the privacy of victims and their families. article e paragraph of the dutch code of criminal procedure in conjunction with e paragraph of the dutch code of criminal procedure. see also wetsvoorstel tot uitbreiding spreekrecht van slachtoffers en nabestaanden legislative proposal for extension of the right to speak of victims and family members july available at www.defenceforchildren.nl p mo mc viewed july . http no. jha http www.defenceforchildren.nl p mo mc implementation security and justice has been preparing a legislative proposal in which the parents of children younger than twelve can exercise the right to speak on behalf of their child. the question is whether parents of victims of child pornography should also be granted an independent right to speak. the abuse of their child who at a young age is certainly entirely dependent on them can already in itself be particularly traumatising for them. the fact that images of the abuse have been made aggravates the traumatic impact see . . and . and brings with it dilemmas that increase stress upon the parents. on the one hand parents want to know what has happened to their child but on the other hand seeing the images can negatively influence the relationship between parent and child. the circulation on the internet of images of a child being abused can in itself be regarded as sexual violence and as victimisation that repeatedly manifests itself time after time. another important ques tion is how justice can be done to victims when it is assumed that they will be victimised time and time again as a result of the distribution of child abuse material re victimisation and what the consequences would be if it were possible for them to receive compensation. . . sentences and orders article b of the dutch criminal code stipulates a custodial sentence of a maximum of four years in principle or a maximum of eight years in principle if making a profession or a habit of for example possession of child abuse material is involved. in terms of the sentence carried article b of the dutch criminal code does not differentiate between different behaviours such as the possession dis tribution and production of child abuse images. the custodial sentences stipulated in article b of the dutch criminal code can be increased by one third in the event that the offence is committed by two press report july available at www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publicaties persberich ten teeven dader gaat betalen.html viewed august . see also parliamentary papers ii appendix to the proceedings no. . the text from the proposal dated july is available at www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publicaties kamerstukken voorstel van wet en memorie van toelichting uitbreiding spreekrecht slachtoffers en nabestaanden in het strafproces.html viewed july . a victim is an individual who has suffered a disadvantage as a direct consequence of a criminal offence see article a paragraph of the dutch code of criminal procedure an individual who has suffered financial damage or another disadvantage as a direct consequence of a criminal offence is considered to be a victim. in the maximum sentence in article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code was increased from six to eight years act of june dutch bulletin of acts and decrees entered into force on july . article of the dutch criminal code partly determines the penalty carried. see the difference in the lowest maximum sentences possible by virtue of the current eu framework decision and by virtue of the proposal of the european commission for a new eu directive. in the pro posal for a new directive the european commission considers amongst other things that in so far as it concerns child pornography production which usually involves approaching and having sexual contact with the child is more serious than other offences such as distributing or offering abuse material which in turn are more serious than possessing or accessing child abuse material proposal for a directive of the european parliament and of the council on combating sexual abuse sexual exploitation of children and child pornography and repealing framework decision jha com final p. . http www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publicaties persberich ad ten teeven dader gaat betalen.html http www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publicaties kamerstukken voorstel van wet en memorie van toelichting uitbreiding spreekrecht slachtoffers en nabestaanden in het strafproces.html http www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publicaties kamerstukken voorstel van wet en memorie van toelichting uitbreiding spreekrecht slachtoffers en nabestaanden in het strafproces.html child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur or more persons acting in association or in the event that the offence is committed within a depend ency relationship. in the event that the offence results in serious bodily injury or if danger to the life of another person can be feared a custodial sentence of a maximum of years or a fine of the fifth category can be imposed. if an offence as described in article b of the dutch criminal code results in death the penalty carried by the offence is a custodial sentence of a maximum of years or a fine of the fifth category. it is also possible to impose a community service order instead of a custodial sentence. suspended sentences and orders can also be imposed. additional penalties can also be imposed alongside the main sentences. a judgment can be pronounced requiring the deprivation of certain rights. if the offence for example in the case of child pornography has been committed within the scope of the convicted individual s profession the individual can also be removed from this profession. some cases are known in which this penalty was imposed but this did not happen or this did not happen solely on the basis of an infringement of article b of the dutch criminal code. article of the dutch criminal code. these circumstances that increase the penalty are also stated in article of the lanzarote convention as circumstances that the court must take into consideration when determining the sentence to be imposed for the criminal offences described in the convention. see also article of the eu framework decision council framework decision jha of december on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography oj l january . a community service order consists of a working order undertaking unpaid work or a training order or a combination of the two article paragraph of the dutch criminal code. at the time of writing the proposal that the training order for those of full age ceases to exist as an independent community service order is before the upper house parliamentary papers i no. a. a suspended sentence or order provides opportunities to work on changing behaviours and to prevent possible reoffending. however this depends not so much on the duration of for example the sus pended sentence as on the duration of the probationary period. as a rule this probationary period is two years. during the probationary period the individual who has been convicted has to adhere to the special conditions and is under rehabilitation supervision. the threat of enforcement of the suspended sentence in the event of non compliance with the conditions functions as a deterrent. the special condi tions that can be imposed in the case of suspended sentences will be described in more detail in . . . this can concern holding an office serving in the armed forces acting as a defence lawyer or court appointed administrator article paragraph of the dutch criminal code in conjunction with article paragraph subsection of the dutch criminal code. article paragraph of the dutch criminal code. see also article paragraph subsection of the dutch criminal code. cf. court of amsterdam october national case law number au suspect is convicted of being guilty of the death of a baby following cardiological intervention and of the fact of making a habit of having child abuse material in his possession. amongst other sanctions imposed the special condition of suspended removal from the profession of doctor for a period of three years with a pro bationary period of three years court of den bosch june ljn ab suspect is convicted for possession of child abuse material committed several times sexual abuse of a patient and sexual abuse of a pupil. amongst other sanctions imposed the special condition of suspended removal from the profession of gp for a period of four years. implementation a recent investigation reveals that deprivation of certain rights is demanded and imposed primar ily in cases of sex offences and fraud. the investigation also brings to light the fact that judges and public prosecutors are often unfamiliar with the possibilities for deprivation of rights. in cases in which the public prosecution service requested removal from the profession or removal from office this was granted in of all sexual abuse cases cases . this investigation concerned sexual abuse cases in which removal from the profession or removal from office was requested between and . the same investigation also revealed that hardly any checks take place on whether the removal has been enforced. an explanation for this is that it is hard to find judgments in which a removal has been imposed as a result of which professional organisations are not often aware of this and therefore do not take appropriate measures. the education inspectorate carries out most checks for removals in particular by means of the requirements for a certificate of good conduct. in sexual abuse cases professions in the healthcare sector form the largest group for which the public prosecution service demands removals and that these are imposed by the court. exact figures regarding the number of removals from a profession in cases concerning child pornography are not known. restrictions in terms of profession and voluntary work are also imposed as a special con dition on individuals convicted in sexual abuse cases that also concern an infringement of article b of the dutch criminal code. this special condition is then associated with a probationary period during which supervision can be exercised in order to determine compliance with this condition see . . . another additional penalty that can be imposed is the confiscation of objects for example which were used to help commit the offence. it is often the case in child pornography cases that certain objects are seized and that the court subsequently confiscates these. these objects can include computers tel ephones and recording equipment see . . . below . profession or habit circumstance which carries an increased penalty those who make a profession of committing one of the child pornography offences or those who make a habit of committing such offences can be sentenced to a higher penalty a custodial sentence of a maximum of eight years or a fine of the fifth category. when does the situation of profession or malsch et al. . see . . . for more detailed information about this. malsch et al. . see for example court of utrecht february national case law number bp sexual abuse of an underage boy grooming showing abusive material concerning children to minors and the possession of child abuse material. amongst other sanctions imposed the special condition of the prohibition of work both professional and voluntary involving children for a probationary period of three years court of den bosch february national case law number bp judgment relevant to articles b and . amongst other sanctions imposed the special condition includes the suspect not be ing allowed to give singing or piano lessons at their own home for a probationary period of three years. . see articles and a of the dutch criminal code. not so long ago in the maximum sentence for the professional or habitual possession produc tion distribution etc. of child abuse material was increased from six to eight years. an important consequence of altering the maximum sentence is the ability to implement greater investigative pow ers that exist by virtue of the code of criminal procedure. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur habit which carries an increased penalty exist can it simply involve the mere possession of images for example or does it have to involve downloading images repeatedly over a certain period of time case law indicates that three aspects play a role here the systematic character of the possession the intensity the quantity of images and the duration of possession. in the court of the hague ruled that it can be described as a habit if one is used to doing something repeatedly over a long period of time the court provides a linguistic explanation for this. it is not a requirement that this activity was undertaken for a commercial purpose. in the court of dordrecht ruled that habitual cases involve a systematic character. the suspect had already been downloading child abuse material for three years and had regular contacts with whom he shared material. in a case handled by the court of zutphen the suspect was occupied with child abuse material almost every day and this was sufficient reason for the court to assume it was habitual. it can also be the case that the suspect has held a subscription for a website relating to child pornography for a longer period of time. this can also prove the systematic character of the behaviour. it is also possible that an individual is sentenced for possessing a small number of im ages. in establishing a habit the intensity and duration of the possession of images are also taken into consideration. this also comes to the fore in the case of the supreme court from december . in this the supreme court considers amongst other things that from the evidence put forward the court has manifestly and not incomprehensibly reasoned that over the proven period of almost three years the suspect repeatedly downloaded saved and stored images and films in many folders on two hard drives and on hundreds of dvds and that he expanded and added to his collection of those images and data storage media over the course of this period resulting in a collection that comprised approximately multimedia files concern the court of the hague april national case law number ba . cf. court of leeuwarden march national case law number bh . in this case the court rules that the circumstance of paragraph which carries an increased penalty does not apply. over a period of under a year the suspect also imported images of child abuse after which he saved them onto the hard drive and other data storage media. at the time that the computer concerned was seized the extent of the collection became clear. the court was of the opinion that the evidence available was insufficient to demonstrate that the duration frequency and intensity with which the images were used constituted a habit. see also court of appeal of amsterdam october national case law number au . court of dordrecht october national case law number bf . court of zutphen april national case law number ba . court of leeuwarden may national case law number ay . see van koppen pp. . see court of rotterdam october national case law number bk the court rules that taking into consideration the statement from the suspect that he visited child pornography websites increasingly often and for increasingly long periods of time as well as tak ing into consideration the quantity of images and the structured way in which the suspect had saved these in different folders it is an established fact that the suspect made a habit of the possession of images . see also court of middelburg february national case law number bl . cf. court of groningen march national case law number bp the court rules that the possession of images of child pornography for a lengthy period of time and a limited degree of distribution alone were insufficient to enable one to regard this as a habit . implementation ing child pornography. based on this the court was able to determine that the suspect made a habit as referred to in article b of the dutch criminal code of possessing those images and data storage media within the meaning of the second paragraph of that stipulation. in his conclusion the advocate general vellinga states amongst other things that possession is a condition that does not lend itself to plurality but that the habitual possession of an image or data storage medium may already exist in the possession of multiple abusive images or multiple data storage media with a child pornography image s . the designation as a habit can also be revealed through the duration of the possession or the way in which possession came about. it may be the case that the suspect collected the images bit by bit and that he therefore came into possession of more and more new images thereby indicating that he made a habit out of collecting and therefore possessing abusive images according to the advocate general loc. cit. the evidence employed concludes that the suspect collected the multimedia files concerned in parts. multimedia files were discovered in this case stored on a large number of different media. storing that amount of data cannot happen at once neither taking into consideration the number of multimedia files nor taking into consideration the fact that these were stored on various media. from the evidence put forward it was therefore decided that the suspect did not take possession of the files all at once according to the advocate general. the proven facts making a habit can therefore be deduced from the evidence employed alone. making a habit of possession of child abuse material can also be proven by the circumstance that the suspect not only collected those images but also organised them. by occupying himself with his possession in such a way the suspect expresses that he not only obtained and saved images from the internet but that by organising his collection he accentuated the continuation of the possession thereby keeping it alive certainly when taking into consideration the extent of the collection and the time that it must have taken to organise the collection according to the advocate general. a sentence for profession or habit can also be imposed if it concerns possession of for example images alone or downloading images repeatedly over a certain period of time. public prosecution service guidelines for demands the criminal procedure guidelines in cases concerning child pornography hereinafter the guidelines provide a framework for the public prosecution service for the formulation of demands. as a starting point both the guidelines as well as the implementation provisions concerning child pornography adopt the view that it is necessary to protect both the child who is directly involved in the production of child abuse mate rial as well as children in general. this applies to children in the netherlands but also to those abroad. a large amount of material is produced in countries where this can take place with very little risk and this is subsequently distributed certainly by means of the internet all over the world in a very short period of time. in addition to the distinction that is made between possession distribution and production of child abuse material which each carry their own sentence in the guidelines these guidelines also take account of three specific factors the nature of the images the age of the victims and the period of time during which the activities took place. when taking account of the nature of the images the poses of the children are relevant as is the question as to whether the images show acts of sexual abuse actual penetration or photos that are supreme court december national case law number bn legal ground . . child pornography guidelines dutch government gazette april no. extended to october dutch government gazette march no. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur violent in other respects. when taking the age of the victims into account the younger the victims are the higher the demands are with regard to the sentence to be handed down. according to the guidelines child abuse material involving children under the age of twelve must carry the most severe sentences. in determin ing the period during which the activities took place a distinction is made between a short period of time and a lengthy period of time. according to the guidelines a short period of time is understood as being a maximum of one year. finally the public prosecution service also looks at reoffending in the event that the suspect has already been sentenced for sexual abuse. the starting point for prosecuting the possession of child abuse material as a predicate offence is a demand of points which means a custodial sentence of days. according to the national child pornography expertise centre a part of the sentence is in practice demanded as a suspended sentence in the majority of cases due to the importance of modification of behav iour a special condition during a probationary period allows for rehabilitation supervision and treatment. special session regarding the possession of child abuse material in order to call attention to the severity of the offences the public prosecution service organises so called special sessions. at the end of such a session was held at the court of the hague in which six suspects stood trial for the possession of child abuse material. the public prosecution service is of the opinion that due to this fact the suspects are partly responsible for maintaining the production and distribution of such material. according to the public prosecution service a working order or suspended custodial sentence does not do justice to the severity of the offences which is why the public prosecution service demands a non suspended sentence in principle. it emerges from the judgments that the court has not followed this demand in all instances. written information from the child pornography expertise centre august . see . . . for more detailed information about this. press release of the public prosecutor s office of the hague special session regarding the possession of child abuse material november available at www.om.nl viewed june . court of the hague november national case law number bo working order of hours six months suspended and a probationary period of five years of which ten months non suspended and six months suspended had been demanded. in particular the court considered the fact that the suspect had the images in his possession for just a short period of time bo the suspect had the images in his possession for over seven years. he had also paid for the images. in this instance also the prosecutor demanded a non suspended custodial sentence of eight months and eight months suspended. the judge also imposed a community service order of hours with a suspended custodial sentence of nine months and a probationary period of five years. in this case the court took into consideration the fact that the man was voluntarily undergoing therapy and that a custodial sentence would interfere with this therapy bo acquittal bo suspect had a relatively small collection of child erotica in his possession. partly due to this reason the judge did not follow the prosecutor s demand for ten months non suspended six months suspended and a probationary period of five years. the suspect was sentenced to a working order of hours six months suspended with a probationary period of three years bo the suspect had searched for material for over two years and had also found it almost one thousand five hundred images. but with regard to this suspect it also primarily concerned child erotica and not hard core child abuse material. the judge did not follow the public prosecutor s demand of eighteen months custodial sentence of which six months suspended with a probationary period of five years in this case either. the court considered a community service order hours and a suspended sentence of six years with a probationary period of three years to be sufficient . the judgment with regard to the final suspect has not been published. http www.om.nl implementation reference points of the national consultative committee for the chairmen of criminal law sectors the reference points of the national consultative committee for the chairmen of criminal law sectors are intended to insure that sentences are imposed on suspects in as uniform a manner as possible. the reference points with regard to article b of the dutch criminal code were established in january . the reference point for possession acquisition and accessing child abuse material by means of an automated action or through the use of a communication service is a suspended custodial sentence of six months and a community service order of hours. the reference point for distribution offer ing open exhibition import transition and export of child abuse material is a non suspended custodial sentence of one year. for the production of such material this is a non suspended custodial sentence of two years. in cases that involve making a profession or habit of committing such offences the reference points are correspondingly higher. production of child abuse material usually occurs in concurrence with other sexual offences. these behaviours carry a sentence that is considerably higher a custodial sentence of six to twelve years than that demanded with respect to the sole production of material as referred to in article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code where the sentence carried is a custodial sentence of a maximum of four years unless circumstances as referred to in article of the dutch criminal code are involved. if for example it is charged and proven that the offence involves production of child abuse material in addition to sexual abuse of a child under the age of twelve years the custodial sentence can be a maximum of sixteen years. factors that increase or reduce the sentence include the number of images physical or digital the period of time over which the collection of images was built up the age of the victim the nature of the image s the type of image for example real or virtual production the professionalism e.g. commer cial purpose intention to make a profit reoffending recidivism and the danger of repetition. the suspect s willingness or not as the case may be to change behaviour recognition of problematic behaviour and insight into problematic behaviour are also factors that are able to increase or decrease the severity of the sentence. factors that increase the severity of the sentence include amongst others the issue of whether the offence was committed within a dependency relationship for example an of fence involving the underage child of the suspect or involving a victim who is not or is hardly able to determine its will in that regard or to make it known or to provide any resistance against it for example as a result of the underdeveloped mental capacities of the victim. see www.rechtspraak.nl organisatie raad voor de rechtspraak agenda van de rechtspraak documents orientatiepuntenenafsprakenlovs.pdf viewed june . a one year non suspended custodial sentence in the event of making a profession or habit of posses sion a non suspended custodial sentence of two years in the event of making a profession or habit of distribution open exhibition import transit and export of child abuse material a non suspended cus todial sentence of four years in the event of making a profession or habit of production of such mate rial reference points of the national consultative committee for the chairmen of criminal law sectors www.rechtspraak.nl organisatie raad voor de rechtspraak agenda van de rechtspraak documents orientatiepuntenenafsprakenlovs.pdf viewed june . no more than a third above the highest maximum if it involves a combination of multiple acts article of the dutch criminal code. other circumstances that increase the sentence apply if the offence was preceded by or goes hand in hand with torture or a serious violent offence and if the abuse was committed by two or more associ ated individuals in accordance with article of the dutch criminal code. http www.rechtspraak.nl organisatie raad voor de rechtspraak agenda van de rechtspraak documents orientatiepuntenenafsprakenlovs.pdf child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur community service order in the public prosecution service implementation provisions concerning community service orders suspects of child pornography are in any case excluded from a basic community service order. the reference points of the national consultative committee for the chairmen of criminal law sectors are based on a community service order but this is in addition to a suspended custodial sentence of six months only in those cases which involve the acquisition or possession of or the gaining of access to child abuse material. it does occur that basic community service orders are imposed for offences as referred to in article of the dutch criminal code see . . . . since there has been discussion surrounding a legislative proposal to limit the possibilities to impose a community service order for serious sexual abuse offences and violent offences and in the event of re offending. the legislative proposal begins by proposing to make it no longer possible to impose a community service order in sentences on the basis of including others article b of the dutch criminal code unless in combination with suspended or non suspended sentences or orders that involve deprivation of freedom. the choice of amongst other offences child pornography was inspired by the desire to highlight the severity of this offence and to emphasise the importance of the protection that this stipulation intends to provide to minors. in sentences for article b of the dutch criminal code basic community service orders cannot be imposed according to the explanation regardless as to whether or not the offence resulted in a serious infringement of the victim s physical integrity. in november the minister for security and justice submitted a government amendment which amended two parts of the legislative proposal. first of all the court would no longer be able to impose a community service order in combination with a suspended or non suspended sentence or orders that involve deprivation of freedom. secondly the discretionary capacity of the public prosecution service in the case of the enforcement of a partly failed community service order would disappear so that in the future the public prosecution service would be required to order the enforcement of alternative detention for those cases. as stated this government amendment proposes abolishing the possibility of imposing a community service order in combination with a suspended or non suspended sentence or orders that involve deprivation of freedom for serious sexual abuse offences and violent offences and in the event of implementation provisions concerning community service orders a dutch government gazette no. . in the event of suspects of serious violent offences or sexual abuse offences a custodial sentence is expressly considered possibly an entirely or partially suspended sentence but not a basic community service order in any case suspects of serious violent offences or sexual abuse offences in which a custodial sentence of six or more years has been imposed and which involve a serious infringement of physical integrity are excluded from a basic community service order. in these cases the suspect should always be summoned. in addition to these violent of fences or sexual abuse offences those suspected of having committed offences contrary to article b of the dutch criminal code amongst others which carry a sentence of less than six years should also be excluded from a basic community service order. those suspects should also be summoned. parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. p. . implementation re offending and therefore to scrap it entirely. the government indicates in this regard that it does not consider it appropriate to the character of the community service order that this could actually be imposed in the case of a sentence for a serious sexual abuse offence or violent offence as referred to in the present legislative proposal. in a response the dutch probation service argued that by removing the possibility of imposing a community service order in combination with a suspended sentence the ability of courts to impose a sanction that is appropriate for the criminal offence and for the offender is reduced including and partly for the prevention of repeat offences and therefore new victims. the council for the judiciary also points out obstacles in practice and thereby states that limiting the freedom of the courts to deter mine the punishment could frequently lead to sentences being imposed that are not proportional to the offence committed. furthermore the proposal means that the specific opportunities that community service orders provide for the realisation of modification of behaviour and reducing repeat offending can no longer be of use. in march an amended legislative proposal finally emerged which stated that a community service order would no longer be possible unless and only if it is imposed in combination with a non suspended sentence or orders that involve deprivation of freedom. it is in this case only pos sible to combine the community service order with a sentence of no longer than six months. at the time of writing the legislative proposal is under discussion in the senate of the dutch parlia ment. the government is of the opinion that keeping open the possibility to combine the community service order with a suspended custodial sentence would leave the door too widely open for punish ments in which the community service order would become too dominant and whereby the suspended custodial sentence imposed alongside it would be subordinate to the community service order. that in itself is in conflict with the premise that the community service order is not a suitable sentence for serious cases of sexual abuse and violent abuse. parliamentary papers ii no. . see also the press release from the ministry for security and justice streep door taakstraf bij ernstige zeden en geweldsmisdrijven getting rid of community service orders in serious sexual abuse offences and violent offences november . letter from the dutch probation service to the members of the vkc for security and justice february www.reclassering.nl viewed june . see also parliamentary papers i no. b p. . see www.rechtspraak.nl viewed june . the council for the judiciary has in addition stated that it is against restricting community service orders for cases concerning child pornography because this could limit judicial freedom which could in turn damage the quality and the suitability of the criminal procedure. the court should allow scope for customisation website of the council for the judiciary www.rechtspraak.nl organisatie raad voor de rechtspraak wetgevingsadvisering adviezen brief nota van wijziging taakstraf fen .pdf viewed june . amendment of the van toorenburg parliamentary papers ii no. . in the present amended proposal it is also proposed to make it no longer possible to impose a community service order un less it is imposed in combination with a non suspended sentence or orders that involve deprivation of freedom in the event of sentences for offences described in article a of the dutch criminal code seduction of a minor and c of the dutch criminal code presence at sex shows in the company of a minor . see article paragraph of the dutch criminal code. parliamentary papers i no.a. parliamentary papers i no.c. http www.reclassering.nl http www.rechtspraak.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . . prosecution and trial in figures a large dark number of instances of child pornography exist. this means that the number of child pornography cases known to the police does not represent the total number of instances of child por nography in society. depending upon the available capacity and upon indications that increase the likelihood of detection amongst other things a certain number of the child pornography cases known to the police are successfully concluded and forwarded to the public prosecution service. this section contains statistical information regarding the cases of child pornography that are registered with the public prosecution service and the child pornography cases that are settled in first instance or on ap peal. this concerns information originating from the public prosecution service in . . . regarding the prosecution of suspects . . . regarding the trial of suspects in first instance and in . . . regarding back ground characteristics of suspects and individuals sentenced in first instance . information originating from the investigation and policy database of judicial documentation in . . . regarding the trial of suspects on appeal . the different items of data in this section do not represent a cohort. after all not all cases registered with the public prosecution service are concluded by the public prosecution service in the same year in which they are registered or settled in first instance or on appeal. it should also be noted that the formulation of the section of the law concerning child pornography does not unfortunately make it possible to differentiate on the basis of subsections between the possession distribution and production of child abuse material. the statistics that originate from the public prosecution service and the investigation and policy database of judicial documentation do not therefore provide information about this distinc tion which is a very relevant one. . . . prosecution in figures number of child pornography cases registered with the public prosecution service figure . shows the trend with regard to the annual number of child pornography cases registered with the public prosecution service against individual suspects in the period between and . the term child pornography cases refers to cases in which child pornography definitely plays a role. it is often the case that these cases also involve other offences in addition to child pornography. finally when interpreting quantitative data the specific context in which the data was collected must always be taken into consideration as well as various factors that may influence the data. for the research justification refer to appendix justification of the research methods employed . public prosecution service data investigation and policy database judicial documentation research. the explanation of the figures displayed in this section the additional tables presented in appendix and the statistics that are applicable to this can be found in appendix . please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data including index figures and the growth in relation to the previous year . implementation figure . number of cases registered with the public prosecution service n um be r year number of cases suspects registered with the public prosecution service during the period displayed a total of cases were registered with the public prosecution service. the annual number of registered cases varies between in and in . a marked increase can be seen in the years and in relation to the three preceding years. according to the pub lic prosecution service this recent increase is the result of a more intensive approach to tackling child pornography that the public prosecution service has been taking since . cases registered in each district court public prosecutor s office figure . displays the district court public prosecutor s offices at which the cases were registered over the total period from up to and including . figure . cases registered in each district court public prosecutor s office total breda other district court public prosecutor s o ces the hague utrecht den bosch amsterdam ro erdam leeuwarden arnhem zwolle these figures differ to a limited extent from the figures that were published in the public prosecution service annual report. the differences are probably the result of different reference dates and possibly other marginal selection criteria. the figures in the public prosecution service annual report are not based solely on article b but are also based on classifications verbal information from the public prosecution service may . public prosecution service . please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data including detailed information with regard to the other ten district court public prosecutor s offices . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the total percentage of cases registered at the different public prosecutor s offices varies between dordrecht and the hague . for each public prosecutor s office the percentage fluctuates each year. the total top consists of the hague den bosch rotterdam arnhem and breda . a large proportion of the child pornography cases conducted by the region or supraregion originates from the department of international police information ipol tbi see . . nature of the registered cases figure . displays the annual number of cases over the period from to broken down into non aggravated and aggravated child pornography offences. the term aggravated child pornography includes making a profession or habit of child pornography. child pornography that is committed in association with another party other parties. child pornography that involves the abuse of authority. child pornography that results in serious bodily injury. child pornography that results in death. figure . nature of the registered cases year aggravated child pornography non aggravated child pornography please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code whether or not in conjunction with paragraph for child pornography offences committed before this concerned paragraph instead of para graph . article b paragraph and or paragraph in conjunction with article paragraph of the dutch criminal code. article b paragraph and or paragraph in conjunction with article paragraph of the dutch criminal code. article b paragraph and or paragraph in conjunction with article paragraph of the dutch criminal code. article b paragraph and or paragraph in conjunction with article paragraph of the dutch criminal code. implementation the majority of cases involve non aggravated child pornography on average . the cases relating to aggravated child pornography mainly involve making a profession or habit of child pornography. three instances occurred in which child pornography was committed in association with another party other parties and one instance occurred in which child pornography involved an abuse of authority all in . the remaining circumstances that result in an increased penalty did not occur. as previously stated it is not possible to ascertain from the statistics whether the prosecution or trial was carried out as a result of the possession distribution or production of child abuse material. however there is strong evidence to suggest that the majority of criminal cases over the past years concerned the possession of such material. research into this matter points in the same direction. the verbeterpro gramma programme of improvements the korpsmonitor police corps monitor on child pornography for and appear to confirm this impression. if this assumption that most cases involve the possession of child abuse material is correct the high percentage of cases of non aggravated child pornography is probably striking considering the fact that proving the circumstance of making a profes sion or habit of the possession of child abuse material which increases the sentence appears to be quite a simple matter. this is possible for example on the basis of the material that is uncovered especially if this consists of a large quantity or if it relates to repeatedly downloading material over a certain period of time see . . . however it is possible that in this case the statistics provide a distorted view and that in reality prosecution takes place more often under the condition that increases the penalty subject to article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code. this discrepancy could then be the consequence of an incomplete registration. based on the analysis of judgments on www.rechtspraak.nl concerning and based on the search term b in the period from up to and including . j.j. oerlemans een verborgen wereld kinderpornografie op internet a hidden world child pornography on the internet fjr tijdschrift voor familie en jeugdrecht journal for family and juvenile law issue october pp. . the research project was carried out in the context of a thesis by the same author entitled kinderpor nografie op internet. dweilen met de kraan open child pornography on the internet. mopping up the water while the tap is still turned on celsus juridische uitgeverij . it should be noted here that this research project only took case law that had been published into consideration. l nnemann et al. p. . landelijk project kinderporno national project to tackle child pornography p. . programma verbeteren aanpak kinderporno programme of improvements in tackling child pornography p. . programma verbeteren aanpak kinderporno programme of improvements in tackling child pornography p. . the focus for tackling child pornography is not clear. four variants exist which contain some degree of variation focus on the victims five of the police forces focus on abuse distribution production seven police forces focus on possession distribution nine police forces and four police forces stated no clear focus see . . . notably if cases were only registered on the basis of the first subsection of b of the dutch criminal code and not on the basis of article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code. however it is not possible to verify the precise manner in which cases are registered at a later stage. http www.rechtspraak.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur registered cases by gravest offence one case may involve multiple offences. figure . provides an overview of the gravest offence re corded for each child pornography case that is registered. the gravest offence is considered to be the offence that carries the most severe penalty. the term does not assess the offence in qualitative terms. figure . registered cases by gravest offences year other o ences human tra cking removing a minor from the care of the person who has legal custody other sexual o ences sexual o ences commi ed against minors non aggravated child pornography aggravated child pornography on average child pornography aggravated or non aggravated is the only offence registered or the gravest offence registered in of cases. in the event that an offence that is graver than child por nography is also suspected this usually concerns a sexual offence often involving a minor . registered cases and preventive detention figure . shows the proportion of suspects registered with the public prosecution service in the pe riod between and that were being held in preventive detention at any time. however this does not mean to say that the suspect was still in preventive detention when the court session took place. please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. in the event of a combination of offences which carry the same penalty child pornography shall be classified as the gravest offence. if following this multiple offences that carry the same penalty still exist the offence that is stated first shall prevail. please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. preventive detention can during the course of its term be suspended or revoked. this data does not therefore provide information with regard to the number of suspects that were still being detained preventively when the judgment was pronounced. in this case it concerns formal preventive deten tion therefore the decision to enforce preventive detention regardless of whether this was actually implemented and the issue of whether or not the suspect was taken into police custody was not taken into consideration. implementation figure . registered cases and preventive detention year no preventive detention preventive detention on average a suspect is taken into preventive detention in of the registered cases. this proportion varies annually between and . number of cases concluded by the public prosecution service figure . shows the development of the number of cases concluded by the public prosecution service over the past five years. the number of cases registered and the number of cases concluded in a year do not form a cohort meaning that the figures cannot be compared with each other. figure . number of cases concluded by the public prosecution service year number of cases concluded by the public prosecution service n um be r in the period between and the public prosecution service concluded child pornography cases. the annual number of cases concluded varies between in and in . in but please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data including index figures and the growth in relation to the previous year . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur predominantly in a considerable increase can be seen. according to the public prosecution service this recent increase is the result of a more intensive approach to tackling child pornography that has been implemented since . concluded cases by type of settlement figure . shows the ways in which the public prosecution service concluded cases in the period be tween and . figure . concluded cases by type of settlement year joinder transfer of proceedings to a foreign court conditional decision not to prosecute out of court se lement unconditional decision not to prosecute summons on average the public prosecution service decides to issue a summons in three quarters of all cases and the unconditional decision not to prosecute is taken in of cases. the remaining types of settlement concern of all cases on average. besides this a decrease in the number of out of court settlements can be seen from in to in as well as an increase in the percentage of conditional decisions not to prosecute from in to in . this is an interesting development considering the fact that conditional decisions not to prosecute can partly be employed as an instrument of influence. see . . . these figures differ to a limited extent from the figures that were published in the public prosecution service annual report. the differences are probably the result of different reference dates and possibly other marginal selection criteria. the figures in the public prosecution service annual report are therefore not based solely on article b but are also based on classifications verbal information from the public prosecution service may . public prosecution service . please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. please note it can be the case that the decision is made to issue a summons exclusively for offences other than child pornography. the condition applied to settled by the public prosecution service does not set requirements for this. these figures differ to a limited extent from the figures that were published in the public prosecution service annual report. the differences are probably the result of different reference dates and possibly other marginal selection criteria. the figures in the public prosecution service annual report are therefore not based solely on article b but are also based on other classifications. be sides this summons also includes joinder in the public prosecution service annual report verbal information from the public prosecution service may . implementation . . . cases concluded in first instance in figures research has not yet been carried out with regard to possible differences between the sentence de manded by the public prosecution service and the sentence imposed by the court. it has also not been examined whether or not increasing the sentence for child pornography cases has affected the sentences imposed and if so how. in the maximum sentence in article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code was as a rule increased from six to eight years. number of cases concluded in first instance figure . shows the development of the number of cases concluded in first instance in the period between and . figure . number of cases concluded in first instance n um be r year number of cases concluded in rst instance number of convictions convicted persons number of non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences imposed number of suspended custodial sentences as the most severe main sentence number of community service orders imposed as the most severe main sentence over the period displayed the court concluded child pornography cases in first instance. the annual number of cases concluded varies between in and in . a decrease in one year alter nates with an increase the following year. the most significant increase occurred in increase in comparison with . this is probably the result of the increase in the number of cases registered with and concluded by the public prosecution service in and . cases settled in first instance by type of settlement figure . shows the decisions made by the court with regard to the type of settlement for cases settled in first instance in the period from to . not by the council for the judiciary either frequently asked questions about child pornography www. rechtspraak.nl viewed april . act of june dutch bulletin of acts and decrees entered into force on july . please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data including index figures and the growth in relation to the previous year . please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. http www.rechtspraak.nl http www.rechtspraak.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur figure . cases settled in first instance by type of settlement other full acqui al conviction year on average of the cases settled in first instance led to a conviction and resulted in full acquittal. other types of settlement hardly took place at all of the total altogether . it is striking that in fewer sentences were imposed and more full acquittals took place in comparison with the previous years relatively speaking. it is possible that this can be partly explained by the fact that the public prosecution service has recently been taking more cases to court with the intention of creating case law with regard to the grey area between the material that does and does not constitute a criminal offence. however without carrying out further research it is not possible to state what the possible causes of this development could be. convictions in first instance by severity of charges figure . provides an overview of the gravest registered offence charged per child pornography case that resulted in a conviction in first instance. the offence that carries the most severe penalty is considered to be the gravest offence. this term does not provide a qualitative assessment of the offence. please note it can be the case that an offender is convicted for other offences than the offence of child pornography. unfortunately the public prosecution service data does not provide reliable information with regard to convictions for in any case child pornography. these figures differ to a limited extent from the figures that were published in the public prosecution service annual report. the differences are probably the result of different reference dates and possibly other marginal selection criteria. the figures in the public prosecution service annual report are therefore not based exclusively on article b but are also based on classifications verbal information from the public prosecution service may . public prosecution service . see also . . . please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. in the event of a combination of offences which carry the same penalty child pornography shall be classified as the gravest offence. if following this multiple offences that carry the same penalty as each other still exist the offence that is reported as being charged first shall prevail. implementation figure . convictions in first instance by severity of charges year other o ences human tra cking removing a minor from the care of the person who has legal custody other sexual o ences sexual o ences involving minors non aggravated child pornography aggravated child pornography on average in of the cases that led to a conviction child pornography non aggravated or ag gravated was the only or the gravest offence. in the event that an offence that is graver than child pornography was also committed this usually concerns a sexual abuse offence often involving a minor . convictions in first instance according to sentence imposed figure . provides an overview of the main sentences that were imposed in the cases that resulted in a conviction in the period from to . figure . convictions in first instance according to sentence imposed year unknown fine as the most severe main sentence community service order as the most severe main sentence suspended custodial sentences as the most severe main sentence non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentence on average a custodial sentence was imposed in of the cases in which the offender was convicted. this involves a fully suspended custodial sentence more often than a non suspended or a partially suspended custodial sentence . in of the cases the imposition of a community service order was involved and in of cases the community service order is the most severe main sentence imposed. the combination of a fully suspended custodial sentence with a community service order occurs most often a please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. either a custodial sentence or youth detention. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur total of times . fines are hardly ever imposed times in total times of which this is the most severe main sentence . the percentage of non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentenc es has increased over the past years from in to in . at the same time a community service order was imposed as the most severe sentence less often in in comparison with an average of in the period between and . this tendency towards more severe sentences is possibly linked with the altered perception of the severity of the offence of child pornography see . . the suspended custo dial sentence imposed as the most severe main sentence fluctuates between in and in . for the cases in which the offender was convicted in the period from to a selection of orders and additional penalties were also examined. in cases placement under a hospital order was imposed in the case of an adult offender and three times an order for placement in a young offenders institution was imposed in the case of an offender who was a minor. a number of judgments involved placement under a hospital order exclusively with regard to child pornography offences and one single case involved placement under a hospital order solely with regard to the possession and distribution of child abuse material and therefore did not relate to the production of material . in these situations under certain circumstances placement under a hospital order can also be required in the interest of the safety of others or for the safety of society in general. furthermore cases involve an order to provide compensation. cases involved the removal of items from circulation and one case involved a confiscation order. the additional penalty of forfeiture was imposed in cases . non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences handed down in the first instance according to term category figure . provides an overview of the term of the non suspended component of the custodial sen tences imposed in the cases in which a judgment involving a non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentence was handed down between and . the national consultative committee for the chairmen of criminal law sectors reference point for possession acquisition and accessing child abuse material by means of an automated process or through the use of a communication service is a suspended custodial sentence of six months and a community service order of hours see . . following this. please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. two examples of judgments in which placement under a hospital order was imposed solely for the of fence of child pornography court of rotterdam december national case law number bk dirk jan p. production distribution and possession of child abuse material and court of dordrecht may national case law number bi distribution and possession of child abuse material . article a paragraph of the dutch criminal code. cf. public prosecution service kinderporno intensiever aangepakt child pornography tackled more intensively which states that the court declared in for the first time that the offence that solely concerns the possession of abusive material concern ing children is also an offence which provides a risk to the inviolability of persons. this does not mean that orders to provide compensation are imposed per se for victims of child pornogra phy. it is equally possible that in a child pornography case an offender is convicted for an offence other than child pornography and that the order for compensation is imposed in relation to that other offence. the suspended component of the partial and full custodial sentences is not displayed here. the fully suspended custodial sentences are therefore also excluded here. please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. implementation figure . non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences handed down in the first instance according to term category year more than years years years years months months months months usually in of cases non suspended community service orders of no longer than a year are im posed. on average of cases involve non suspended community service orders of more than two years. it is striking that non suspended custodial sentences with a shorter term were imposed more often in than in the preceding years. however this is not necessarily in contradiction with the previously stated trend towards more severe sentences. it is possible that in cases in which a community service order would usually have been imposed in the past it is now more often the case that a non suspended sentence with a relatively short term or a partially suspended custodial sentence is imposed. bnrm has not carried out any further research into this. in and the community service orders did indeed more often than in preceding years have a longer term see figure . . community service orders handed down in first instance according to term category figure . provides an overview of the term of the community service orders that were imposed in the cases in which a sentence was handed down which in any case involved a community service order in the period from to . figure . community service orders handed down in first instance according to term category years more than hours hours hours fully suspended whether or not in combination with another more severe main sentence. please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur usually in of cases non suspended community service orders have a term of between and hours. of cases involve a shorter term and cases involve a fully suspended community service order. in and community service orders with a longer term were imposed more often than in preceding years. cases settled in first instance in which an appeal was lodged figure . shows the development of the percentage of cases settled in first instance in the period between and per year in which an appeal was lodged in relation to the total number of cases settled in first instance. the party which lodged the appeal is also displayed. figure . cases settled in first instance in which an appeal was lodged year by both parties only by the suspect only by the public prosecutor an appeal was lodged in of the total cases settled in first instance. this was usually partly lodged by the suspect by the suspect by both the suspect as well as the public prosecutor . in the period between and the percentage of cases in which an appeal was lodged varies between in and in . in both the public prosecutor and the suspect lodged an appeal in a con siderably greater number of cases than in the previous years in of cases. it is possible that this is partly the result of previously stated recent developments fewer prosecutions and more severe sentences . . . . cases settled on appeal in figures number of child pornography cases settled on appeal figure . shows the development of the number of cases settled on appeal in the period from . the figures have been corrected to take into account appeals that were lodged at a later stage. please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. please note for the figures relating to higher appeal originating from the investigation and policy database judicial documentation figures only up to and including the year are displayed see appendix justification of the research methods employed . public prosecution service data in vestigation and policy database judicial documentation research. please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data including index figures and the growth in relation to the previous year . implementation figure . number of cases settled on appeal n um be r year number of cases se led on appeal number of convictions convicted persons number of non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences number of suspended custodial sentences as the most severe main sentence number of community service orders as the most severe main sentence in the time frame displayed child pornography cases were settled by the court on appeal. the num ber of cases settled each year is roughly . in the lowest number of cases were settled n but this number will probably have increased by a subsequent reference date. cases settled on appeal according to settlement type figure . shows the decisions with which the court settled the cases on appeal in the period between and . figure . cases settled on appeal according to settlement type total public prosecution service or suspect has no cause of action full acqui al conviction other more than of all cases settled on appeal led to a conviction and led to full acquittal. see appendix justification of the research methods employed . public prosecution service data investigation and policy database judicial documentation research. please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. please note it may be the case that an offender is convicted exclusively for other offences than that of child pornography. unfortunately the public prosecution service data does not provide reliable information with regard to convictions for child pornography in any case. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur convictions on appeal according to sentence imposed figure . provides an overview of the sentences that were imposed in the cases settled on appeal that resulted in a conviction in the total period from . figure . convictions on appeal according to sentence imposed total non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentence suspended custodial sentence as the most severe main sentence community service order as the most severe main sentence fine as the most severe main sentence on average a custodial sentence is imposed in of all cases in which a judgment is handed down on appeal. this involves a fully non suspended or a partially suspended custodial sentence slightly more often than a fully suspended custodial sentence . of the cases involve a community service order being imposed and in of cases the community service order was also the most severe main sentence imposed. the combination of a fully suspended custodial sentence with a community service order occurs most often times in total . in comparison with the sentences imposed in first instance more severe main sentences are imposed on appeal. a possible explanation for this is that the more serious cases more frequently lead to an appeal. bnrm has not investigated this in further detail. non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences handed down on appeal according to term category figure . provides an overview of the term of the non suspended component of the non suspended or par tially suspended custodial sentences in the cases in which an appeal was lodged between and . figure . non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences handed down on appeal according to term category total months months months months years years years more than years please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. either custodial sentence or juvenile detention. see figure . . please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. implementation in of all cases the non suspended component of the custodial sentence is no longer than one year. in a quarter of cases it involves a term of more than two years. in comparison with the term of the non suspended custodial sentences imposed in first instance custodial sentences with a longer term are imposed more often on appeal. this also applies to the term of the community service orders see figure . in comparison to figure . . in this case it is also possible that this can be explained by the assumption that more serious cases more frequently lead to an appeal. community service orders handed down on appeal according to term category figure . provides an overview of the term of the community service orders that were imposed in the cases in which an offender was convicted between and . figure . community service orders handed down on appeal according to term category hours hours more than hours the majority of cases involve non suspended community service orders of between and hours. of the cases involve a shorter term and suspended community service orders are not imposed on appeal. . . . characteristics of suspects and persons convicted number of suspects and persons convicted please refer to figure . number of cases registered with the public prosecution service for details of the development in the annual number of suspects registered with the public prosecution service. the development in the number of individuals sentenced in first instance can be seen in figure . num ber of cases concluded in first instance second line from the top number of convictions convicted persons . gender of suspects and persons convicted almost all the suspects as well as the individuals sentenced are men and respectively . see figure . . please refer to appendix table b . for the table containing the complete summary of this data. please refer to appendix tables b . and b . for the tables containing the complete summary of this data. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur age of suspects and persons convicted figure . provides an overview of the age distribution of suspects registered with the public prosecu tion service in the period between and . figure . shows the distribution with regard to persons convicted in first instance. the age is determined by the date that the first registered offence was committed. figure . age of suspects year unknown n a legal entity years years years years years years on average approximately one third of the suspects are younger than years of age. minors make up eight percent of the suspects. the remaining suspects the other two thirds are therefore older than years of age whereby it is striking that a considerable proportion is older than years old. for more information with regard to perpetrators please refer to . . . figure . age of persons convicted year unknown years years years years years years the distribution of the ages of convicted persons is roughly the same as that of suspects. the biggest difference with regard to suspects is that the percentage of minors is on average lower amongst suspects in comparison to . please refer to appendix tables b . and b . for the tables containing the complete summary of this data. implementation . . trends the following trends emerge from the figures collected. an increasing number of prosecutions and trials are being carried out for offences concerning child pornography the annual number of child pornography cases registered with the public prosecution service increased in and . this also applies to the number of child pornography cases settled by the public prosecution service. this trend is visible with regard to the courts in first instance in . according to the public prosecution service these recent developments are the result of a more intensive approach towards tackling child pornography. in particular convictions are being handed down for non aggravated child pornography the vast majority of child pornography cases registered at the public prosecution service involve non aggravated child pornography . this is striking considering the fact that it is relatively easy from a legal point of view to prove the circumstance of making a profession or habit of possession of child abuse material which increases the penalty. however it is possible that these figures provide a distorted view of the reality as a result of incomplete registration. child pornography offences often also involve other sexual offences if a graver offence than child pornography is involved in the same child pornography offence that is registered with the public prosecution service this almost always involves a sexual offence usu ally involving a minor. this also applies to child pornography cases in which suspects are sentenced by the courts in first instance. conditional decisions not to prosecute are being made occasionally but increasingly often in the period between up to and including the percentage of conditional decisions not to prosecute increased from to . this is an interesting development considering the fact that condi tional decisions not to prosecute can partly be employed as an instrument of influence. relatively speaking fewer prosecutions took place in the percentage of prosecutions in first instance in was lower than in the preceding years compared to an average of in the period between and . it is possible that this can partly be explained by the fact that the public prosecution service is taking less obvious forms of child pornography to court more and more often. these less obvious forms of child pornography can include virtual child pornography or child pornography involving adolescents. the public prosecution service is also taking cases to court with the intention of creating case law with regard to the grey area between the material that does and does not constitute a criminal offence. in most cases a suspended custodial sentence with a community service order is imposed in the event that a sentence is imposed in first instance a fully suspended custodial sentence in com bination with a community service order is imposed in half of all cases. on appeal this figure is ap proximately . in first instance as well as on appeal this is the most prevalent combination of main sentences imposed in child pornography cases. increasingly severe sentences are being imposed in the period between up to and including the proportion of non suspended or partially sus child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur pended custodial sentences increased from to . at the same time a community service order was imposed as the most severe main sentence less often in comparison with an average of in the period between and . it is possible that this tendency towards more severe penalties is linked to the altered perception of the severity of the offence of child pornography. furthermore the term of the non suspended component of the custodial sentences imposed was shorter in . however this does not have to be in contradiction with the previously stated trend towards more severe sentences. it is possible that in cases in which a community service order would usually have been imposed in the past it is now more often the case that a non suspended sentence with a relatively short term or a partially suspended custodial sentence is imposed. the community service orders imposed in and carried a longer term more often. it is very rare that detention under a hospital order or placement in a young offenders institution is imposed in the total period of time between and placement under a hospital order was imposed in cases for an adult offender and an order for placement in a young offenders institution was imposed three times for an offender who was a minor. a number of judgments involved place ment under a hospital order exclusively with regard to child pornography offences and one single case involved placement under a hospital order solely with regard to the possession and distribution of child abuse material and therefore did not relate to the production of such material . in these situations under certain circumstances placement under a hospital order can also be required in the interest of the safety of others or for the safety of society as a whole. appeals were lodged more often in it is possible that the above mentioned developments fewer convictions and more severe sen tences result in part from the fact that appeals were lodged more often by the suspect and or the public prosecutor in in comparison with an average of in the period between and . more severe and longer sentences are imposed on appeal than in first instance in both the first instance as well as on appeal a large majority of prosecutions regarding child por nography cases resulted in a custodial sentence being the most severe main sentence imposed in first instance and on appeal . this involves a custodial sentence with a non suspended com ponent more often on appeal non suspended suspended whilst in first instance this involves a fully suspended custodial sentence more often non suspended suspended . besides this the custodial sentences with non suspended components have longer terms on ap peal than in first instance first instance no longer than one year and over two years on appeal no longer than one year and over two years . this also applies to the term of the community service orders. a possible explanation for this is that the more serious cases lead to ap peal more often. perpetrators who are convicted and stand trial are men of all ages almost all of the suspects and persons convicted are men. one third of the suspects are younger than years old whereby of the suspects and of the perpetrators who are prosecuted are minors and one fifth of the suspects are older than years old. implementation . . conclusion national public prosecutor s office at present the prosecution of child pornography offences in first instance is carried out exclusively at district court public prosecutor s offices. considering the scope and complexity of some cases it is necessary to consider whether this type of case should not also be made part of the remit of the national public prosecutor s office so that the national public prosecutor s office can play a guiding role in extensive complex and cross border cases and can also be involved in the development of innovative detection methods. diversity of conduct which constitutes a criminal offence article b of the dutch criminal code covers various forms of conduct ranging from gaining access to and possession of child abuse material to the production and distribution thereof. the formulation of the section of the law does not from the statistical material lay out how prosecution and trial relate to the various forms of conduct. a formulation consisting of various categories should be taken into con sideration. it is possible that the new forthcoming eu guideline provides occasion for re examination of the formulation of the current provision of penalties. determination of the punishment the above distinction is also relevant for the process of imposing sentences. in practice the court usu ally imposes a suspended custodial sentence in combination with a community service order. from the figures there appears to be a clear tendency towards imposing more severe sentences the proportion of non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences increased in the period between and and in a community service order was imposed less often as the main sentence. at present it is still unclear if and to what extent the possibilities for imposing community service orders will be limited in the future for cases involving a breach of article b of the dutch criminal code. limiting the possibilities to impose a community service order particularly if this would no longer be possible in combination with suspended sentences would in any case provide courts with fewer opportunities to tailor the sentence to the individual case. in this context possibilities for influencing behaviour by means of supervision on the basis of conditions imposed for a suspended prosecution for example must also be taken into consideration. alternative means of settlement in june the government stated in a letter to the lower house that other methods of settling cases must be sought. this mainly concerns the possession of child abuse material. the distinction between the different forms of conduct is also relevant here. however the rationale behind abolishing or limiting the possibility to impose a community service order stricter sentencing does not seem to correspond with the alternative means of settlement which the public prosecution service and also the government are seeking namely for those offences contrary to article b of the dutch criminal code which are relatively mild cases such as the possession of a small quantity of material where the suspect has not had any previous involvement with judiciary in this field. victims in criminal proceedings the handling of criminal cases with regard to identified victims of child pornography raises a number of relatively new questions. in addition the issue involves victims who are by definition par ticularly vulnerable as they are always children. there is currently no statutory or other provision to child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur guarantee the complete anonymity of victims in criminal proceedings in situations such as this and as such to protect the identity and personal details of victims. the way in which this can be achieved without this being contrary to article of the european convention of human rights must be inves tigated. an important question concerns the issue of how justice can also be done to victims when it is assumed that they will become victimised time and time again as a result of the distribution of child abuse material revictimisation and what the consequences would be if it were possible for them to receive compensation. this should be investigated in more detail. whether parents as such should be regarded as victims and whether they should for example also be granted the right to speak in this capacity and not just as a representative of their child is currently under discussion. the judge in the amsterdam sexual abuse case is expected to deliver a judgment about this issue in the near future. . after care for and supervision of sex offenders . . introduction in almost all cases sex offenders who are convicted return to society. this sometimes arouses very intense emotions amongst the general public based on the sometimes justified fear that children will once again be victimised. the group of offenders that commit sexual violence against children is however heterogeneous and the likelihood of re offending varies. nevertheless it is apparent that paying attention to the after care and supervision of sex offenders who have returned to society the tailoring of these activities and the framework in which they are applied all form a vital link that can prevent sex offenders from re offending. the lanzarote convention states that paying attention to perpetrators is an essential component of an integrated approach to the tackling of sexual violence against children. compulsory supervision takes place within a legal framework. however this is not the only framework within which after care treatment and supervision take place. the partners within the judicial do in this section after care and supervision are discussed with regard to offenders of sexual violence against children in general in view of the fact that it is not easy to make a clear distinction between offenders of different forms of sexual violence against children. however special attention should be paid to the specific challenges that are associated with the internet usage of those individuals who view child abuse material. see . . about perpetrators. in view of the maximum sentence on the grounds of a sexual offence in connection with the system of cumulation of penalties there will come a time in almost all cases when the sex offender will return to society. articles of the convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series . parliamentary papers ii no. pp. . see . for the british stop it now treatment programme whereby those who view child abuse mate rial are able to come forward themselves and the possibilities on the basis of the municipalities act that will be discussed in further detail in . . . implementation main are not the only ones who play a role in this regard or who are able to assume a role. below the legal framework within which after care and treatment take place will firstly be explained. in . . information will be presented in figures relating to after care and supervision implemented by the dutch probation service in relation to sex offenders who are sentenced in part for offences contrary to article b of the dutch criminal code. after care for and supervision of sex offenders are forms of tertiary prevention and comprise a number of interventions that are applied after a sexual offence has taken place. the aim is to prevent re offending or to limit this and thereby help prevent people from becoming victims. these possible interventions the starting points that apply in this regard and the form and extent to which these interventions are implemented form the essence of this section. from the reports concerning returning offenders of sexual violence against children in am stelveen eindhoven loppersum weesp and wijk bij duurstede the image that emerges is that interventions made by authorities vary throughout the country and or are not always attuned to one another. the mayor of breda responded to notification from the public prosecution service regarding the release of a convicted sex offender and his return to society in the following manner it is not sufficient to simply inform i can be aware of it but then what certain measures need to be put into place with regard to that man. we need to supervise paedosexuals who return to society in a more effective manner. the following parties are involved in the provision of after care to former detainees municipalities pe nal institutions the ministry of security and justice safety houses employee insurance agency centre for work and income and community organisations such as housing associations and care institutions. the figures were provided to the bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings by the dutch probation service partly involving figures from the salvation army and the neth erlands institute for psychological care and addiction care. tertiary prevention involves interventions with persons groups and situations after sexual abuse has already taken place. tertiary prevention is aimed at preventing the continuation or repetition of abuse. measures involved in tertiary prevention relate for example to early detection and limiting harm to victims. see smallbone et al. p. and . . other interventions that can lead to prevention are covered in further detail in . . weesp wil veroordeelde pedofiel niet terug in buurt weesp does not want convicted paedophile to return to the area rtv n h radio tv north holland april www.rtvnh.nl nieuws weesp wil veroordeelde pedofiel niet terug in viewed august . pedo eindhoven onvindbaar en zonder toezicht eindhoven paedophile untraceable and unsupervised e nvandaag november www.eenvandaag.nl weblogs post viewed august . mogelijk provincieverbod pedofiel loppersum possible provincial ban for loppersum paedophile rtv noord september www.rtvnoord.nl nieuws nieuws.asp pid viewed august . belachelijk dat pedo terugkeert it s ridiculous that a paedophile is returning to society de telegraaf april www.telegraaf.nl binnen land belachelijk dat pedo terugkeert .html viewed june . wijk bij duurstede verdeeld over pedofiel wijk bij duurstede prosecutes paedophile rtv utrecht de cember www.rtvutrecht.nl nieuws viewed august . local government january week p. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur as explained in chapter the term child pornography is not clear or unambiguous neither in rela tion to perpetrators abusive material concerning children or victims nor in relation to conduct. this means that interventions can be equally unclear as will be described on the basis of two problems that have been observed in relation to offenders namely the issue of offenders who have been convicted for sexual violence against children and who return to society in the same municipality or region where the offence was committed and the problematic usage of the internet by those who have been convicted for viewing child abuse material. on the basis of these points we will clarify the necessity for an integrated approach towards after care and supervision the elements of which this must consist and the extent to which this is already the case in the netherlands. attention will also be paid to experiences in other countries which could be used as examples for the development of an integrated approach in the netherlands. the extent to which attention is paid to an integrated approach or to which an integrated approach is employed varies for each region and each authority. the findings from the korpsmonitor also illus trate this point. approximately half of all police regions seek cooperation with authorities that provide help and treatment for suspects such as het dok de waag de reclassering the probation service and algemeen forensische psychiatrie general forensic psychiatry afp in the form of referral by the general practitioner or judicial authorities. best practices in this regard need to be collected and promoted. carrying out research into the desirability of an integrated framework regarding convicted perpetrators of sexual offenses against children and the centralised direction of this system such as exists in the united kingdom will form part of the recommendations. . . legal framework various opportunities exist within the legal framework to enable the provision of supervision to sus pects and perpetrators of sexual abuse offences including those involving child pornography. it is also important to outline the legal possibilities that are available in so far as after care is concerned. the op portunities to provide supervision that are presented in this section focus primarily on supervision and after care within the legal framework. this framework also has its limits. in the event that a custodial sentence is imposed with a term longer than four years no part of this may be suspended and special conditions cannot therefore be associated with this. supervision and after care are therefore also not possible in this form. supervision of a convicted sex offender can also no longer be provided after execution of the sentence. experts have already stated in the past that given the current legal framework it is not possible in the netherlands to extend a period of supervision in the event that a treatment indication exists for this and that special legislation for the compulsory treatment and after care of sex offenders seems in chapter the way in which technology has affected the nature of child abuse material is ex plained. the internet can play a problematic role in the lives of those who view child abuse material see . . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography p. see also . . article a of the dutch criminal code. in the event that a custodial sentence is ordered with a maxi mum term of two years the court is able to order that the sentence is not carried out either with regard to the whole sentence or for a part of it. if the custodial sentence that is ordered has a term of more than two years and a maximum of four years only a part of the custodial sentence may be imposed as a suspended sentence. implementation necessary from a preventive point of view. in this context the state secretary for security and justice has indicated the need to investigate whether it would be possible to extend the current supervision to life long supervision following the completion of treatment under placement under a hospital order. in germany a similar regulation is already established in the law. although it is a general rule that supervision can take place for a minimum of two and a maximum of five years it appears that the possibility has been created for the court to provide supervision for an unlimited time if the convicted perpetrator has committed a certain sexual offence such as the sexual abuse of chil dren . the purpose of the law seems to be that this unlimited period of supervision can only be imposed by the court if the convicted perpetrator has been sentenced to a custodial sentence for a minimum of two years or has been placed in a psychiatric hospital or is being treated for addic tion. furthermore concrete facts or indications must exist to suggest that without supervision the convicted perpetrator would represent a threat to society because he or she could be able to van marle mulder . a legislative amendment is currently being prepared in order to make it possible to provide life long supervision following intramural treatment of those placed under a hospital order who have com mitted a sexual offence. the government has stated that research into permanent supervision of sex offenders who have concluded treatment under placement under a hospital order should be carried out. in order to be able to arrive at a responsible implementation of this life long supervision it is necessary to gain greater insight into the target group of sex offenders for whom this order is intended and into the possibilities for the implementation of this supervision. for the purpose of the intended legislative amendment the directie sanctie en preventiebeleid dsp directorate for sanctioning and pre vention policy and the directie wetgeving dw directorate for legislation have asked the scientific research and documentation centre to provide an overview of various legal frameworks for life long supervision such as those that have been designed in a number of other countries. besides this it is important to gain insight into the scope and background characteristics of the group of sex offenders who were placed under a hospital order who were recently released into society. in order to be able to arrive at an effective implementation of the supervision it is relevant to examine the methods of supervision and after care that could be employed for the implementation of life long supervision. www.wodc.nl onderzoeksdatabase permanent toezicht op zedendelinquenten.aspx viewed sep tember see also press release tbs ers met zedenverleden levenslang onder toezicht those placed under a hospital order with a history of sexual abuse under life long supervision ministry of security and justice february . the legislative amendment elaborates on the research into the permanent supervision of sex offenders already announced in the coalition agreement. the research will focus on the way in which supervision must be implemented and the categories of sex offenders to which the measure should apply www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publicaties persberichten tbs ers met zedenverleden levenslang onder toezicht.html viewed june . the information from this website seems to suggest a somewhat broader approach than the description of the research by the scientific research and documentation centre. article c paragraph of the strafgesetzbuch german criminal code . all sexual offences for which supervision for an unlimited time applies are reported in articles c a and of the strafgesetzbuch. http www.wodc.nl onderzoeksdatabase permanent toezicht op zedendelinquenten.aspx http www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publicaties persberichten tbs ers met zedenverleden levenslang onder toezicht.html child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur once again commit serious offences. in order to limit this risk of re offending during supervision there exists the opportunity amongst others to prevent the convicted perpetrator from having contact with a certain group of people such as children or from visiting certain places. various means of settlement exist within which special conditions can be imposed. the public pros ecution service has the opportunity to postpone the decision as to whether prosecution will have to take place for a certain amount of time subject to certain set conditions a suspended decision not to prosecute. the public prosecution service is also able to issue a punishment order which can specify behavioural changes in that case the probationary period can last a maximum of one year. conditions can also be imposed by the court for suspending the pre trial detention and imposing a sentence or order or for extending the probationary period. convicted perpetrators are able to be released on pa role in which case certain conditions with regard to their behaviour can also be imposed. the public prosecution service oversees the observance of the conditions. the probation and after care service can be instructed by the court to provide help and support to the convicted perpetrator to enable him her to adhere to the conditions. in practice it is therefore often the case that probation and after care su pervision involves the convicted perpetrator having to comply with instructions from the probation and after care service. if a condition is not complied with the court is able at the request of the public pros ecution service to order that the sentence that was not executed should still be executed or whether or not subject to maintenance or amendment of the conditions order that a part of the sentence that was not executed should still be executed. this functions as a deterrent or as a helping hand to the convicted perpetrator to ensure compliance with the conditions. for sex offenders who are minors a different system of suspended sentences and orders applies despite the fact that the conditions that influence behaviour and supervision are in essence also relevant to this group of perpetrators. article c paragraph of the strafgesetzbuch. article b of the strafgesetzbuch states all measures that may be imposed during supervision. article paragraph of the dutch code of criminal procedure. article paragraph e of the dutch code of criminal procedure. the public prosecution service settlement act entered into force on february dutch bulletin of acts and decrees . article of the dutch bulletin of acts and decrees. article of the dutch criminal code. the law has recently been amended by the act of july for the amendment of the dutch criminal code and the dutch code of criminal procedure in connection with the order for placement under a hospital order with conditions amendments to placement under a hospital order with conditions dutch bulletin of acts and decrees. entered into force on september dutch bulletin of acts and decrees. . article a paragraph of the dutch criminal code. the probationary period commences on the day of the conditional release article c paragraph of the dutch criminal code. the probationary period of a special condition is determined by the public prosecution service but is at the most the same as the period for which conditional release is granted article c paragraph of the dutch criminal code. this means that the supervision of special conditions remains limited to this period. article d of the dutch criminal code. article g paragraph of the dutch criminal code. article b of the dutch criminal code see also article w of the dutch criminal code the order that influences behaviour. in . . youth offenders are discussed in more detail. implementation conditions when suspended sentences are imposed general conditions are then imposed and special conditions that are linked to an associated probationary period may also be imposed. during the probationary period the convicted perpetrator must comply with the special conditions and is subject to probation and after care supervision. the list of possible special conditions available under the law is non exhaustive. in practice the behavioural condition is employed amongst other things for the enforcement of a street ban the enforcement of outpatient treatment and compliance with instructions from probation and after care in a general sense. instruction from probation and after care services can also include outpatient treatment such as attending a day programme at a clinic or undergoing treatment at a department of the netherlands insti tute for psychological care and addiction care in so far as and for as long as the probation and after care staff considers this to be necessary. an obligation to undergo such treatment can therefore either be included in the judgment itself or can be left to the probation and after care services for further implementation. term of probationary period the maximum term of the probationary period for a suspended sentence is two years for the special conditions relating to bail and the behavioural condition. for all other conditions payment of damages admission to a care institution and paying a sum of money into the criminal injuries compensation fund the maximum term of the probationary period is three years. since the maximum sentences re new act entered into force on february a probationary period with a maximum term of ten years may be imposed in certain cases for all conditions in the event that it is necessary to seriously take into account the likelihood that the convicted perpetrator will once again commit an offence that is directed towards or will present a risk to the physical inviolability of one or more persons. this possibility has been included in the law in order to be able to monitor the convicted perpetrator for a longer period of time for example in certain cases of sexual abuse or for cases involving offenders with psychological disturbances. this long probationary period will be particularly important for certain behavioural condi tions such as outpatient treatment or instructions from probation and after care services. conditions for convictions for child pornography in cases involving child pornography the individual may have been charged with the production of child abuse material or with having committed sexual abuse. besides treatment the special condition in the form of a contact ban or street ban can then be imposed for example with a probationary period which may last up to ten years. in case law involving other sexual offences in addition to acting in breach of the general condition is that the convicted perpetrator does not commit a criminal offence prior to the end of the probationary period. this condition applies by law see article c paragraph of the dutch criminal code. examples of special conditions include the payment of compensation admission to a care institution bail payment to the criminal injuries compensation fund or other special conditions such as a behavioural condition article c paragraph of the dutch criminal code. article c paragraph of the dutch criminal code. cleiren verpalen ed. tekst en commentaar strafrecht text and commentary on criminal law article c paragraph of the dutch criminal code p. with reference to supreme court june dutch law reports and supreme court october dutch law reports . article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code. cleiren verpalen ed. tekst en commentaar strafrecht text and commentary on criminal law article b of the dutch criminal code p. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur article b of the dutch criminal code other special conditions can be imposed such as not being allowed to carry out voluntary work aimed at children not being permitted to affiliate with a scouting organisation not being allowed to use social networking sites to approach minors and not being al lowed to give singing or piano lessons at home. judgments have also been known in which a convicted perpetrator has had to make a contribution to ecpat. in one of these cases a suspect was sentenced to a community service order of hours and a suspended custodial sentence with a term of six months with a probationary period of three years for the possession of child abuse material. because the court judged that a working order and a suspended custodial sentence would not suffice it imposed the special condition for the suspended custodial sentence amongst others that the suspect must be forced to transfer a sum of euros to defence for children ecpat in amsterdam. in cases involving child pornography some judgments are also known in which a computer ban or inter net monitoring has been imposed as a special condition. these are drastic measures. in one case that stood before the court of zutphen the public prosecution service requested the special condition that the police would be able to digitally inspect the data storage media of the suspect at any time but the court chose not to follow this request in view of the implementation of this in practice and the possible breach of fundamental rights associated with this the court rules that there are too many objections. however the court was of the opinion that the same effect could be achieved by imposing the special condition that the suspect would have to comply with the instructions from probation and after care services. in this case the suspect was placed under a conditional order including the condition that he would not be allowed to have possession of a computer unless approval for this was granted first. the right to access the internet is also the subject of discussion within the european union. com plete prohibition of access to the internet should only be permitted if this is appropriate pro portionate and necessary within a democratic society and must specifically respect the pre court of utrecht february national case law number bp . court of den bosch february national case law number bp . court of middelburg december national case law number bl . see also court of rotter dam august not published in which a conviction was made for the possession of child abuse material whereby a working order of hours and a suspended custodial sentence of months with a probationary period of years were imposed with a payment of euros into the defence for children ecpat fund as a special condition. court of amsterdam april not published ban on having an internet connection during the probationary period court of zwolle february national case law number bl allowing probation and after care services to monitor computer and internet use court of almelo june national case law number bm monitoring of computer for presence of child abuse material carried out by the vice squad court of utrecht february national case law number bp monitoring of the computer by probation and after care services and a ban on the use of social net work sites to approach minors . court of zutphen july national case law number bj . europa nu europees parlement akkoord met telecom pakket na regeling voorwaarden afsluiten gebruikers internet european parliament agrees with telecom package following regulation regarding conditions for dis connecting internet access for users www.europa nu.nl id vi wc z wmxo nieuws europees par lement akkoord met telecom ctx vhxlds ipzk start tab viewed june . http www.europa nu.nl id vi wc z wmxo nieuws europees par ad lement akkoord met telecom ctx vhxlds ipzk start tab implementation sumption of innocence and the right to privacy. on april the european commission sent a notification to the european parliament the council and the european economic and social committee and the committee of the regions. in this notification the commission did not an nounce any new measures but did emphasise the importance of the timely implementation of the measures contained in directive ec in amendment of directive ec regarding a joint policy with regard to net neutrality. a fixed definition of net neutrality does not exist but since may within the field of telecom member states have been obliged to promote the capacity of end users to gain access to information and to distribute this or to make use of applications and services of their choice. the special representative of the united nations also highlights the importance of the internet in the matter of freedom of opinion in his report the internet is an indispensible tool for realizing a range of human rights combating inequality and accelerating development and human progress. he expresses serious concerns about the way in which access to the internet is sometimes denied on the basis of some examples of national legislation in which a ban for use of the internet can be imposed. he concludes that not allowing users access to the internet is always contrary to the right of freedom of opinion. member states must be obliged to make the internet accessible and affordable for everyone. by imposing a ban on access to the internet as a special condition the fact must be taken into consideration that access to the internet is formulated as a fundamental right in international bodies and it is determined that any restriction of this would by definition be contrary to the right to freedom of opinion amongst other things. legislative proposal for special conditions in a legislative proposal for the amendment of the dutch criminal code was put forward in con nection with amendments to the regulation of the suspended sentence and the regulations governing releases on parole. the legislative proposal provides for amendments to a number of points includ ing the establishment of a non exhaustive list of special conditions in legislation. it also creates the opportunity for rapid action to be taken in the event that conditions are not complied with. besides this the intention of the legislative amendment is also to ensure that the authority of proba tion and after care services to issue instructions as a special condition is anchored more firmly in the eu telecoms reform reforms to pave way for stronger consumer rights an open internet a single european telecoms market and high speed internet connections for all citizens memo december . com final eu official journal. c . the date of implementation for directive ec is namely may . see article paragraph g of the directive ec. report of the un special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right of freedom of opinion and expression un doc a hrc may . report of the un special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right of freedom of opinion and expression un doc a hrc may . report of the un special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right of freedom of opinion and expression un doc a hrc may . parliamentary papers ii . the legislative proposal also provides for the training order in the suspended sentence the training order should be revoked as an independent community service order. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur judgment. in the future this amendment should prevent the situation in which in the judgment a special condition stating merely compliance with the instructions from probation and after care services is deemed sufficient. on the one hand this amendment serves the interests of legal certainty and on the other hand the intention is to contribute to the effectiveness of probation and after care supervision. according to the government the judgment and therefore to a significant extent the conditions need to be described as specifically as possible. the legislative proposal sets out to re flect current practice as much as possible especially with regard to the special conditions in the form in which they can currently be imposed which in some instances only involves a codification. the legislative proposal provides for an extension to the list of special conditions which remains non exhaustive. this list includes a location ban amongst other things. in the event of a location ban the convicted perpetrator is not allowed to go to a certain place or the surrounding area for example if the offender lives in the vicinity of a victim this condition is regularly imposed in the event of sexual abuse in particular . a location ban is usually imposed in combination with electronic monitoring. besides this the list also provides for a location order. an example of this is the imposition of house arrest. another possibility is that the convicted perpetrator is not allowed to leave the netherlands without the approval of probation and after care services. this can be the case in the event that the suspect has committed criminal offences abroad. this special condition can be imposed in the case of child sex tourists. besides this special condition the list also includes the opportunity to impose an obligation to report and outpatient treatment. the list does not include any explicit conditions that are specifically associated with monitoring computer use and access to the internet. partly in light of international developments such as those outlined above more detailed research is required in order to reveal the extent to which imposing these conditions would be contrary to fundamental rights the effects that such special conditions could have and whether or not imposing these special conditions would also be able to be implemented in terms of capacity both of the police and of probation and after care services. the proposed special conditions also differ from the proposed legal measure of an exclusion order contact ban or an obligation to report in the sense that they have different purposes. whereas the suspended sentence with special conditions is intended to permanently influence the behaviour of the convicted perpetrator the legal measure is intended to restore the system of law and order that has been breached. the legal measure is specifically intended for those cases in which the court does not wish to or is not able to influence behaviour through the imposed sanction but does want to restore the legal order by a restriction of freedom. special conditions have a greater scope than the legal measure as their focus is on exerting a lasting influence on behaviour. this is therefore also the reason why in the legislative proposal there is no provision for supervision of the probation and after care services in connection with the legal measure. see also parliamentary papers ii no. note with reference to the report p. . no judgments can be found on www.rechtspraak.nl in which a de facto ban on travel has been imposed. for which a legislative proposal has been submitted namely amendment of the dutch criminal code and the dutch code of criminal procedure in connection with the implementation of a legal measure restricting freedom legal exclusion or contact order parliamentary papers ii . an amended pro posal of law was sent to the upper house on april and is currently being dealt with parliamentary papers i no. a. parliamentary papers ii no. note with reference to the report p. february . http www.rechtspraak.nl implementation exclusion order by the mayor a municipality also has the opportunity to impose an exclusion order on the basis of article para graph of the municipalities act. this provision rules that the mayor has the authority in the event of a breach of public order or serious concern with regard to the creation of such a breach to take measures that are necessary to maintain the public order. an exclusion order can also be imposed on the basis of the corresponding general municipal by law. this enables a mayor to prohibit someone from taking up residence in a particular place. in order to impose an exclusion order a number of conditions must be complied with. the exclusion order may only be imposed in the event that the circumstances dis turbance of public order so require. the order must also be intended to end the disturbance of public order or to limit the consequences of this disturbance. what is more the term of the exclusion order must be associated with the duration of the disturbance of public order. the term of the order may not be disproportionately long. with regard to the exclusion order on the basis of article paragraph of the municipalities act a maximum of three months seems to be applied. in the event that orders that limit freedom are set aside by the court including exclusion orders this tends to be due to previously stated conditions not being taken into consideration. according to the minister of the interior and kingdom relations the problem was not due to the possibilities that exist under the law but to how these powers were applied. it is not always the case that it is the individual who is returning to society who is responsible for disturbing public order through his her own behaviour. the response that is an ticipated from the neighbourhood in relation to his her presence can also give cause to take action. in order to be able to take adequate steps if this is necessary a mayor must however have access to relevant information see . . . below . on the basis of the information that is available the mayor must then make an assessment. the mayor of eindhoven banned a convicted sex offender van der v. from living in eindhoven. on the basis of this decision van der v. raised an objection and ultimately lodged an appeal at the administrative tribunal. the administrative tribunal decided in his favour and judged that the exclusion order imposed by the mayor constituted a disproportionate infringement of his freedom see letter dated june from the minister of the ministry of the interior and kingdom rela tions to the lower house regarding research into the effectiveness of legal instruments in relation to inconvenience and deterioration p. parliamentary papers ii no. as soon as the imminent disturbance is over the order must be revoked with reference to administrative jurisdiction department of the council of state june ab . in principle the order must immediately counteract the disturbance with reference to administrative jurisdiction depart ment of the council of state november ab . in the application of the exclusion order the statutory regulations may not be deviated from unless it appears from the competence that space has been left for this article paragraph of the municipalities act does not provide such space. in future imposing the measure must comply with the requirements of subsidiarity and proportionality. see letter dated june from the minister of the ministry of the interior and kingdom relations to the lower house regarding research into the effectiveness of legal instruments in relation to incon venience and deterioration p. parliamentary papers ii no. . explanatory memorandum to the decree of june regarding the amendment of the judicial data decree associated with the provision of judicial data to the mayor upon the return of former detainees to society and reinforcing screening in the taxi sector. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur of movement as regards its scope and duration. the court of den bosch considered amongst other things that the imminent threat of disturbance of public order can be used to justify the limitation of fundamental rights including the right to freedom of movement. there must exist a reasonable balance between the general importance of counteracting an imminent disturbance of public order as a result of the plaintiff s unsupervised return to society and the unsupervised stay of the plaintiff in eindhoven prior to the obligatory probation and after care supervision commenced in the probationary period on the one hand and the importance of respecting the plaintiff s fun damental rights on the other hand including the right to freedom of movement . as a general starting point it must be assumed that an exclusion order is not permitted to last any longer than is strictly necessary and that the area to which the ban relates must be limited as much as possible. because the imminent disturbance of public order does not stem from the plaintiff but from a third party the interest in respecting his rights must be assigned a greater weight than would have been the case in the event that the threat had originated from him. van der v. is now alleging that he has suffered damage as a result of the exclusion order and has taken civil action against the municipality of eindhoven. the possibilities of supervision and after care that have been described above concern the judicial and administrative framework. below the substantive conditions with which effective tertiary prevention must comply will be described. . . integrated approach after care for and supervision of offenders no specific framework has yet been formulated in the netherlands for the integrated after care and super vision of sex offenders. however the literature points to the importance of an integrated approach to tackling offenders of sexual violence against children and in doing so distinguishes between starting points . . . and phases . . . . various examples of these starting points being employed can also be found in the regions. on the basis of different phases that are relevant within an integrated ap proach the extent to which diverse actors are involved or could be involved in the implementation of court of den bosch august national case law number bn . the administrative court considered in the future the differing interests must be considered in light of the respondent on the basis of the authority assigned in article third paragraph of the municipali ties act. this authority includes a limited order to be able to act quickly in urgent situations and was not called into being in order to drastically restrict fundamental rights. the democratic legitimisa tion for this is lacking. furthermore a drastic restriction of fundamental rights is not apparent and foreseeable on the basis of article third paragraph of the municipalities act. see www.nu.nl binnenland verbannen pedoseksueel eist schadevergoeding.html viewed june . the emphasis in this sub section lies where possible on those who have committed a child por nography offence in this case individuals who produce distribute and possess child pornography . however literature regarding the after care and supervision of this specific group is not present to a large extent. more is known about interventions for convicted sex offenders with regard to children. the dutch literature regarding interventions and implementing organisations that has been employed mainly applies to a wider group of offenders than solely those who have committed child pornography offences. for reasons of clarity this group will be referred to using the general term offender. smallbone et al. pp. . http www.nu.nl binnenland verbannen pedoseksueel eist schadevergoeding.html implementation an integrated approach will be outlined. it is important to gain an insight into on the one hand the way in which the various regions can benefit from one another s knowledge and experience and on the other hand the steps that can be undertaken to ensure that a case is dealt with in a clear and integrated manner bringing together the interests of all parties involved. examples from other countries will also be discussed which may be of benefit to the approach to be implemented in the netherlands. . . . starting points the action plan to tackle child abuse states that the application of criminal law for tackling sexual abuse of children must be aimed at putting an immediate stop to the abuse preventing re offending by means of targeted interventions and restoring the standard that has been breached. this cannot be achieved exclusively through punishment of the offender. the interests of the child must be key. from this point of view criminal law may be implemented in order to guide offenders towards the use of as sistance services for offenders. this may be achieved by imposing special conditions in the event of a suspended sentence or a conditional decision not to prosecute or in the event of suspension of pre trial detention see . . above . the criminal law then functions as a deterrent. application of criminal law is specifically applicable if the mental and or physical integrity of the victim who is a minor is seriously under threat considering the nature of the harm in any case in the event of grievous bodily harm and or the frequency systematic nature of the violence. criminal action is one of the possible routes that can be taken following the reporting of serious abuse if necessary in combination with one of the other routes also being applied voluntary or compulsory assistance for child and perpetrator or a child pro tection measure. the center for sex offender management csom in the united states formulated a number of starting points specifically for convicted sex offenders which link in with this notion and should be applied to all phases of an integrated model namely specialised knowledge and training raising public awareness monitoring and evaluation and cooperation. in practice in the netherlands these starting points are represented individually in the form of various initiatives. the importance of interconnectivity between all of the starting points and the necessity of a central executive administra tion in order to enable an integrated approach are especially evident in the establishment of the safety houses and scenario teams see the box safety houses at the end of this section . the center for sex offender management csom was founded in . since then the center has been developing and collecting best practices from national and local jurisdiction in the united states. besides this the csom arranges training sessions and provides technical assistance to all relevant actors who are involved with after care and supervision of sex offenders. five starting points formulated by the csom for an integrated approach towards sex offenders and related examples from practice in the netherlands are outlined below. focus on the victim when providing after care and supervision to an offender the victim must be taken into consideration first of all. this means that the interests of victims play a clear role in decisions regarding the interests of offenders. strategies with regard to after care and supervision should not overlook the requirements of victims re traumatise them or have a negative impact on them in any other way. this balancing of in terests can create troublesome dilemmas. the possibility exists especially in cases where offenders are see parliamentary papers ii no. . center for sex offender management a see www.csom.org viewed june . http www.csom.org child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur involved who have committed a hands on offence upon a victim such as sexual abuse or the production of child abuse material that if offenders re establish themselves in the same neighbourhood the victim will run the risk of being confronted with the offender. after all it is often the case that sex offenders and victims know one another see . . and . . . however a new place of residence for a convicted sex offender can also present risks. it is possible that institutions and individuals with an identifying role will lose sight of him resulting in a failure of supervision which means that it is possible for a repeat offence to occur. as outlined in the box below scenario teams such as those in friesland attend specifi cally to the requirements of potential victims in the event of social unrest regarding sex offenders. the deployment of dual track or multiple track teams also works to safeguard the interests of the victim. specialised knowledge and training specialisation knowledge and training are important. as far as specialised knowledge and monitoring are concerned the probation and after care service is just like its partners in the criminal justice pro cess the police and the public prosecution service constantly increasing the extent of its specialism in sexual abuse. this is evident in the facilitation of separate sexual abuse programmes cosa and programmes in which there is attention for the specific issues involved with regard to sex offenders. however it will prove a challenge for supervising bodies and caseworkers to obtain and maintain knowl edge about the digital aspects that from the nature of the case have a necessary role in the behaviour of offenders and that must therefore also receive the necessary attention in the supervision and treatment of these offenders. raising public awareness the reactions from members of society towards sex offenders in cases involving victims who are minors are understandable but are sometimes based on inaccurate perceptions and incorrect information. it is important to provide the public with information and this can take place on a national or local level. see . . for more information about the dual track or multiple track teams. the tilburg multiple track team is a case consultation in which partners in the chain carry out an analysis of a case of sexual violence on the basis of which a well considered scenario is drawn up for three tracks namely the offender the victim and the involved party within the frameworks of sentence civil and assistance. it is then deter mined by whom the actions are to be implemented and it is discussed whether or not coordination with more tracks is necessary written information from the tilburg safety house july . this emerges from the certification of vice detectives in the police specialised public prosecutors relat ing to sexual abuse cases in the public prosecution service amongst others. probation and after care services also strive to deploy the most experienced probation and after care workers for the supervision of sex offenders verbal information from the chair of the board of management of the dutch proba tion service april . this is not yet applicable to youth probation and after care which is taken care of by the youth care agencies. see cosa box in . . . . a new form of supervision has been arranged for those placed under hospital orders who remain as outpatients forensic psychiatric supervision. what is new about this form of supervision is that the forensic psychiatric centre and the probation and after care service are no longer only responsible for part of the course of the offender returning to society but from their expertise are collectively involved in the supervision of the treatment of those placed under a hospital order during the whole course of the process of the offender s return to society see harte et al. . implementation on a local level information can remove prejudices but it can also increase vigilance whenever there is need to do so. in wijk bij duurstede a working group was established following unrest after it emerged that a sex offender who had been convicted of sexual violence against children was living in the horden district. this working group consisted of local residents supplemented by an official from crisis manage ment and a special educational expert from the municipal health service. after some time the working group established that peace had been restored in the neighbourhood. monitoring and evaluation interventions depend entirely on their effectiveness. many of the interventions stated below have not yet been evaluated in the netherlands. however developments have been set in motion in order to comply with the important what works principles. for some time now the probation and after care organisa tions have been undertaking initiatives in order to comply with these principles as much as possible. it is also important that initiatives be monitored and evaluated in the future and that best practices are collected and shared. an example of this is the web report nazorg ex gedetineerden after care of former de tainees which includes the experiences of municipalities with returning offenders in a general sense. cooperation the final underlying starting point for an integrated approach is cooperation. cooperation goes further than the mere contact between obvious actors as supervising bodies and those in charge of the case. cooperation is possible with each individual and authority that has an influence on or is affected by the conduct of the offender. the action plan to tackle child abuse reports that it is of great importance that a clear and simple structure must be in place in order to support the decision making process about the steps that are to be undertaken in the event of sexual abuse of children and to determine its imple mentation. in this structure besides the public prosecution service the other cooperating organisations including the police the youth care agencies child abuse counselling and reporting centres and the child care and protection agency must all be assigned a role in order to make a correct assessment regarding the application of criminal law on the basis of adequate access to information. in order to make criminal action possible it is desirable to set up clear frameworks for detection prosecution criminal proceedings victim assistance and local cooperation. similar multidisciplinary joint associations in the netherlands include safety houses and scenario teams. the other starting points described for an integrated approach come to the fore in the safety houses and municipal health service scenario teams discussed below. various safety houses are still currently under establishment and or have no experience of the issue of sexual abuse. the safety houses are aimed at gemeente praat met de horden over pedofiel local council talks with residents of de horden about paedophile de weekkrant april www.deweekkrant.nl pa ges.php page viewed august . poort eppink p. . see www.vng.nl smartsite.dws id viewed june and samenwerkingsmodel nazorg volwassen ex gedetineerde burgers gemeenten justitie cooperation model for after care of adults former detainees who are residents municipalities justice vng . parliamentary papers ii no. it emerged that some safety houses still have no experience with sex offenders following the bureau of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings sending a notice to various safety houses in june . see capgemini pp. for specific challenges faced by safety houses. http www.deweekkrant.nl pa ad ges.php page http www.vng.nl smartsite.dws id child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur different groups of offenders such as lover boys and multiple offenders . convicted sex offenders do not constitute a separate group of offenders. experiences of sex offenders are possibly included in the former detainees group of offenders. safety houses in safety houses authorities local councils the police the public prosecution service the child care and protection board and probation and after care organisations and welfare agencies work together in one location for the purposes of detection prosecution and the provision of assistance. the partners in the chain point out problems devise solutions and implement these solutions together. work processes are coordinated so that criminal law and care complement each other. efforts are made to change behaviour reduce the likelihood of re offending and improve the quality of life of the sex offender. work is carried out with a specific focus on the offender area and prob lem. safety houses got off the ground on a local level and are consequently tailored to specific local situations. the first safety house in the netherlands in tilburg specifically sought to con nect with victims by including the provision of adequate care to victims in its objectives. safety houses are also able seek a connection with the regional action plan against child abuse rak see . . . organisations and institutions provide a contribution to the operation of the safety house from their own tasks and responsibilities. during the cooperative activities in the safety house spe cific problems can become apparent to certain partners during implementation or in legislation and regulations. it remains the responsibility of the partner s concerned to take the necessary measures to deal with these problems. a designated partner within the chain is responsible for supervising the implementation. this can present problems in practice because it is possible that the demands and understandings of the organisations that are involved may differ. the tilburg safety house is striving for a clear supervision of the implementation by means of a pilot. one party creates the master plan and the other parties provide a particular part of the product. such clear division of roles and supervision that is more centralised has aspects in common with the british multiple agency public protection arrangements mappa described in . . . where the probation and after care organisations are the ones that make decisions about the way in which sex offenders are supervised. furthermore the tilburg safety house has put together a scenario team to be deployed whenever there is a threat of social unrest in a sexual abuse case. these scenario teams exist in various regions. the working procedure of the scenario team in friesland is described below. see www.veiligheidshuizen.nl achtergrond viewed august . see www.veiligheidshuizen.nl achtergrond viewed july . see www.veiligheidshuizen.nl achtergrond inrichting viewed july . tilburg care and safety house pp. . berenschot verwey jonker instituut pp. . see www.veiligheidshuizen.nl achtergrond inrichting rollen viewed july . ministry of justice p. . ministry of justice p. . tilburg care and safety house p. . see for example scenario seksuele kindermishandeling en maatschappelijke onrust scenario for sexual child abuse and social unrest from ggd noord en midden limburg at www.seksueelgeweld.info doc al lescenarios concept.doc viewed july . http www.veiligheidshuizen.nl achtergrond http www.veiligheidshuizen.nl achtergrond http www.veiligheidshuizen.nl achtergrond inrichting http www.veiligheidshuizen.nl achtergrond inrichting rollen http www.seksueelgeweld.info doc allescenarios concept.doc http www.seksueelgeweld.info doc allescenarios concept.doc implementation friesland scenario team since municipalities in friesland have had scenario teams at their disposal. these teams are multidisciplinary and support local authorities the public prosecution service and the police in their efforts to limit social unrest. depending on the type of case a specific team of specialists is compiled that takes the various interests involved in the crisis into consideration. for example in the case of sexual offences involving young children the municipal health service not only takes the social commotion in the village into account but also takes the individual provision of as sistance to the young victims into consideration. the advantages and disadvantages of specific interventions are weighed up for each situation. various interests play a role in this. for example an informative meeting can help reduce unrest amongst parents. at the same time a large meet ing can give children the impression that there is something really serious at hand because all the parents have been gathered together in a hurry. this presents the risk that the children will consider the crisis to be increasing in size rather than decreasing in size. a standard scenario is available for the return of sex offenders to society. but it is also possible in situations where a criminal investi gation is underway and a large amount of uncertainty exists in the society regarding the facts that the scenario will also provide results. based on past experiences steps are set in motion from the time of the report declaration up to the end of the hearings of witnesses the phase between the hearing and possible arrest of suspects up to and including the conclusion of the investigation and up to the legal proceedings and the possible release of suspects. . . . phases in the integrated approach each of the phases described below represents a period or an area requiring special attention during and for the purpose of after care and supervision of offenders. these relate to detection prosecution and trial diagnosis and recommendations treatment supervision and registration and notification respectively. the interventions described here form the sum total of measures and the actors that are responsible for them which when taken together would be able to contribute to an integrated approach and are required to do so. within each of the phases various actors may have different interests that sometimes go hand in hand but are sometimes conflicting. for example informing mayors with the intention of combating social disruption can sometimes stand in the way of the su pervision of sex offenders. the enforcement of sentences may also hinder treatment that has already been set in motion. including perpetrators on registers in order to serve the interests of victims may violate the rights of convicted perpetrators. as part of the discussion of the various elements we will also examine how much attention is devoted to problematic internet use by perpetrators of child pornography. the following definition is employed in friesland as a working definition of social unrest for serious violent offences severe concern and emotional responses by various groups of people as a result of a shocking event a serious violent offence in which there is a risk of escalation disturbance of public order and safety and an increase in the problems related to this event. this text is largely based on partoer cmo fryslan ggd fryslan and www.burgemeesters.nl scenarioteams viewed july . center for sex offender management a center for sex offender management b. smallbone p. states the following as offender oriented tertiary prevention strategies identification and detection specific deterrence general and selective incapacitation and rehabilitation. http www.burgemeesters.nl scenarioteams http www.burgemeesters.nl scenarioteams child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur detection prosecution and trial in the previous chapters . and . detection prosecution and trial were discussed in depth. there are three reasons that are further elaborated on in the present sub section as to why the initial contact with the law constitutes an important phase of an integrated approach of after care and supervision regarding the offender. first of all concentrating on increasing the chance of catching sex offenders who have not yet been convicted forms a successful preventive strategy see box perspective on offender oriented tertiary prevention . secondly contact with the law may form a reason to implement further interven tions in the realm of after care and supervision see . . above . thirdly digital and analogue data can be collected during detection as put forward below that may be important for probation and after care services in order to provide advice about the risk of re offending and or important for those providing treatment to enable them to provide therapy or implement interventions that will influence behaviour. perspective on offender oriented tertiary prevention the literature outlines a number of remarks on the extensive implementation of interventions that are aimed at convicted sex offenders. finkelhor concludes that no research has yet been carried out into the effectiveness of the current tertiary offender oriented preventive measures. increasing the chance of catching sex offenders should therefore produce a more effective preventive result than placing the focus on the existence of re offending. according to finkelhor focusing too specifically on offenders who have already been prosecuted only resolves a small part of the problem thus even strategies that are percent effective in eliminating recidivism among known offenders would reduce new victimizations only a little. for these reasons finkelhor proposes a number of areas requiring special attention that are applicable to offender oriented prevention strategies detection should focus on offenders who have not been previously detected and tertiary prevention strategies directed at the of high risk offenders. what is more tools should be developed in order to detect high risk offenders and low intensity strategies should be devised for low risk offenders. posters on the bbs lead one to suspect that more experienced collectors of child abuse material per ceive themselves as being unassailable estimate the chance of being caught as low and have a low opinion of the quality of detection institutions see jenkins pp. . finkelhor pp. . finkelhor pp. . it is established that the majority of the sexual offences are committed by people who are not known to the police. in the netherlands the police prioritise re offending for child pornography cases with no indication of production and or hands on abuse . those who view child abuse material who have already been convicted for a sexual abuse offence are detected prosecuted and stand trial sooner under similar circumstances than viewers who do not have a criminal record although hands on abusers can most certainly be found within this group of non convicted offenders see . . and . . . finkelhor . uniformly applying interventions without differentiating between offenders is not a desirable strategy in preventing the further victimisation of individuals. providing intensive treatment to convicted of fenders with a low risk of re offending may even be counterproductive see van horn pp. . the explanation for this is that those sex offenders who are treated intensively copied the behaviour of the offenders with a high risk of re offending with whom they were in the same group for therapy. finkelhor also states that investments should be made in the development of prevention pro grammes that are aimed at potential victims who are minors see . . implementation initiatives have already been developed in the netherlands that correspond with the areas requiring special attention that have been stated. the initiatief niets doen is geen optie doing nothing is not an option initiative indigo of the rotterdam rijnmond police district forms an example of low intensity interventions that are applied to low risk viewers of child abuse material. diagnosis and recommendations the aim of diagnosis by probation and after care or behavioural experts is to be able to make an as sessment of on the one hand the risk that the offender will re offend and on the other hand the risk of harm to victims and society and to be able to establish the possibility of influencing the offender s behaviour. on the basis of such a diagnosis a recommendation is formulated. a basic requirement when putting interventions into place is that the offenders are able to bear responsibility for their own behaviour. they must be responsive to interventions responsiveness . their behaviour has to change as a result of and following the use of the interventions. as long as behavioural change cannot be achieved the risk of re offending continues to exist. it emerges from the literature that the likelihood of reoffending recidivism is highest amongst those with a preferential or exclusive predilection for children. the highest percentages of recidivism are found amongst the group with a homosexual preference for boys in the pre adolescent years. the group of unmarried men whose victims are boys outside of their family has a re offending percent age of over a period of years. the combination of sexual offences that have been com mitted in the past and an excessive consumption of alcohol also seem to have a predictive value. the lowest likelihood of re offending is found amongst offenders who have committed incest. the intention of indigo is to be able to take action without having to pursue the whole course of detec tion and without having to take the criminal prosecution route. a group of suspects that were selected commenced treatment. a number of others had a good chat with the police whereby they were issued with a cautionary notice. if it appears that something is wrong with an ip address again or if new in formation emerges an individual may still be prosecuted see www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertisecentrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx viewed june . see also . . . poort pp. poort eppink pp. . a diagnosis involves determining the likelihood of an individual re offending as well as determining the risk of injury. the risk of injury does not only involve the likelihood of personal injury for others but also the severity of that injury in short risk of injury likelihood of personal injury x severity of personal injury . this does not apply to sex offenders with psychological and psychiatric disorders. poort eppink p. . lanning p. . leuw et al. . finkelhor pp. . leuw et al. . it seems that those who commit incest are usually situational offenders because they only make use of the availability of their younger family members. they re offend less often if the family situation that facilitated and fostered the abuse in the first place no longer exists. this does not necessarily mean that it is not possible that abuse may take place frequently and over a long period of time it is merely intended to provide information about the likelihood of repeat offences following discovery prosecution and trial. http www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertisecentrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx http www.jaarberichtom.nl jaarverslag typeinfo.cijf adu landelijke expertisecentrum kinderporno vroegtijdig ingrijpen.aspx child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur these risks need to be determined. such a risk assessment therefore also forms part of a diagnosis. in order to be able to carry out these risk assessments the probation and after care services use the actu arial risk assessment instruments risc and static in order to estimate the risk of re offending. the higher the likelihood of re offending the more intensive the interventions should be in terms of time and scope. in this process it is not the offence itself but the person who is central. it may the case that more interventions are desired for a hands off offender who possesses child abuse images and who has a high risk of re offending and causing harm than are required for a hands on offender who has committed incest. therefore the importance of an accurate diagnosis and recommendations is great. risk assess ment with respect to those who possess or view child abuse material is still quite a challenge. at present no risk assessment instruments exist that are able to effectively differentiate between those who view child abusive material who pose a threat for committing a hands on offence and those who do not. the risk assessment instruments risc and static look at historical and statistical risk factors surrounding hands on offences see also . . table . . in this process the assessor also looks at dynamic risk factors by for example carrying out discussions with the offender and going over reports. digital data of offenders such as collections of child abuse material and other memorabilia offender offender and offender victim communication can be useful for diagnosis and treatment advice. this information can provide useful insights into the offender s behaviour and it is important that this information is included by the police in the report so that the probation and after care services can use it for risk assessment. treatment article of the lanzarote convention prescribes that suspects as well as convicted perpetrators must have access to treatment programmes. for suspects access to measures is voluntary and must not have any negative consequences with regard to the right to a fair trial and in particular to the presumption of innocence. with regard to the treatment of adult offenders the convention only makes reference to outpatient behavioural interventions and therapies. outpatient treatments for sex offenders are generally provided by forensic outpatients departments. specific programmes have been formulated for van horn pp. . court of den bosch december national case law number an . court of zutphen october national case law number bo . taylor et al. p. . the same difference is important for offenders who groom children online with a view to actual hands on abuse in the offline real world and those who groom children online but where the intended result is not actual physical contact. see table . and table . for explana tions of the definitions hands on and hands off . van horn pp. . static factors conducive to crime appear to be strong predictors of re offending. however they cannot be influenced. such static factors surely need to be considered in the diagnostic process but in selecting an intervention dynamic factors that can be influenced must predominantly be sought as these can be changed see poort eppink pp. . van montfoort consultancy firm the dutch probation service p. . taylor et al. pp. davidson gottschalk pp. . convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series . parliamentary papers ii no. p. . see . . about youth offenders. implementation youth sex offenders paedosexuals and sex offenders with intellectual disabilities and this is also the case for individuals who view child abuse material. the literature recommends treating individuals who view child abuse material hands off in a separate group as the risk of contamination with the hands on group is present. bringing low risk offenders and high risk offenders or offenders with a high risk of re offending together can also pose a risk because it is possible that the first group of of fenders may copy the behaviour of offenders with a high risk of re offending with whom they were in the same group for therapy. in cases involving the wider group of offenders of online sexual violence against children therefore offenders who carry out online grooming in addition to individuals who view child abuse material it appears that this group differs from those who commit sexual violence against children offline. however no separate treatments are available for that group of offenders in the neth erlands. a number of authors conclude that this is also not necessary providing that existing treatments also provide for the treatment needs of offenders committing online sexual violence against children. the motivation of offenders to change is relevant to the success rate. the judicial framework often gives the impetus for this motivation but it sometimes occurs voluntarily. article of the lanzarote conven tion prescribes that signatories must guarantee that people who fear that they will subject children to sexual violence also have access to intervention and treatment programmes. an example of such an intervention is the british stop it now treatment programme whereby those who view child abuse ma terial are able to come forward themselves see . . . . treatment centres in the netherlands are also already receiving applications from individuals who view child abuse images. in such cases treatment can take place face to face but also anonymously by telephone or via the internet. an entire online self help programme can be found at www.croga.org. although these types of self help programmes are not able to replace face to face treatment they can make an important contribution in the case of those of van beek pp. . centre for outpatient forensic psychiatry de waag offers group treatment for individuals who have downloaded child pornography see www.dewaag utrecht.nl pool docu ments kpd def. gr beh kinderpornon downloaders apr kleur.pdf viewed june . taylor et al. pp. . van horn pp. see also court of alkmaar february national case law number bh . davidson gottschalk pp. . davidson gottschalk pp. . specific treatments for online offenders have been developed outside of the netherlands. in the united kingdom where similar internet offences made up a third of the total number of sexual offences in the internet sex offender treatment programme i sotp was developed. a project exists in basel in which individuals who view child abuse images but have not committed a hands on offence are regarded as individuals with problematic internet usage. the therapy also places a focus on problems such as loneliness boredom and unfulfilled sexual needs. convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series . parliamentary papers ii no. p. . for example the group treatment for individuals who have downloaded child pornography at the centre for outpatient forensic psychiatry de waag. www.dewaag utrecht.nl pool documents kpd def. gr beh kinderpornon downloaders apr kleur.pdf viewed june . http www.croga.org child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur fenders who want to stop. since child pornography offenders come together online for various reasons and with different intentions see . . . and . . also in dutch language internet forums these self help strategies should be brought to the attention of offenders in those environments if suitable because it is possible that offenders may be in one of the early stages of delinquent conduct and would be receptive to therapy. self help strategies could also be displayed in the list of results from search engines whenever search terms relating to child pornography are entered. supervision supervision is a combination of monitoring of and guidance for offenders to ensure that they adhere to the special conditions. the probation and after care services monitor offenders to see whether they are adhering to the special conditions and provide guidance at the same time. the mappa model is an example of integrated monitoring which is in force in england and wales. multiple agency public protection arrangements mappa in england and wales the so called mappa system exists for the supervision of sex offenders and the probation and after care services play a central role within the system. since the role of the probation and after care service has been embedded and reinforced by means of so called mappa legislation. the probation and after care service works with so called multiple agency public protection panels hereinafter mappps . these panels make decisions about the way in which su pervision is implemented in the case of a specific sex offender. the probation and after care service is tasked with assessing which sex offenders present the highest risk and pose the greatest threat. a personal plan of supervision and guidance is formulated for each sex offender. the mappps help the sex offender to rehabilitate by helping him her find a job and accommodation. the probation and after care service also carries out home visits. the greater the risk of re offending the greater the intensity of the guidance and supervision. the probation and after care service remains in charge of the guidance and supervision of the offender but works together with a range of institutions for this purpose such as social services educational institutions and housing associations. monitoring is the tool that is used to ensure that the special conditions are observed and to observe any threat that these conditions may be breached whereas guidance is a tool that is used to change behaviour. the means and methods of monitoring include discussions between the supervisor and the offender and monitoring via his her informal and formal networks amongst other things. research davidson gottschalk p. taylor quayle p. . see www.depers.nl binnenland de oneindige beerput.html viewed june when entering the search term boylover associated with child pornography into the search engine google.nl the search results refer to numerous sites where sex with children is discussed. the program google adwords could be used to place a sponsored link to self help strategies above the search results whenever an individual googles terms relating to child pornography. poort p. . the nature and duration of the special conditions are described in . . . poort p. . uk criminal justice act sections . uk ministry of justice . multi agency public protection arrangements annual report . ministry of justice statistics bulletin pp. . poort pp. . http google.nl implementation reveals that monitoring on its own is not effective and may even have an adverse effect. as a comple mentary component of supervision guidance is essential if this is to be carried out effectively. for this reason the following aspects of guidance are important the relationship between the supervisor and the individual under supervision listening and talking building up and maintaining an individual s network helping the individual to obtain accommodation and work and to maintain a relationship and case management. formal contact that does not involve informal monitoring as part of it does not appear to be an effective way of reducing re offending. convicted perpetrators benefit from the involvement of their immediate social and personal environment. this outlines the importance of a project such as cosa which is described in the box below. cosa the circles of support and accountability cosa were developed in canada in . the dutch probation and after care services are currently engaged in projects aimed at introducing this method for the re integration of sexual abuse offenders. the intention behind the activities of intensively supporting offenders and supervising their re integration into society is to reduce the likelihood of re offending. in cosa the offender is the core mem ber. an informal network consisting of three to five volunteers forms an inner circle around the core member. the members concentrate on supporting the offender both practically as well as emotionally. by maintaining close and informal contact with the offender the intention is to be able to identify behaviour that indicates that the offender is likely to re offend at an early stage. further to this supervision of the offender is increased by the involvement of volunteers. the outer circle is formed by professionals such as the police and the probation and after care services. the volunteers therefore form a type of interface between the offender and the professionals. the professional outer circle is responsible for the supervision and implementation of the rehabilitation of the core member. an employee from probation and after care services fulfils the role of circle coordinator and is responsible for the operation of the inner circle and the sharing of information within the circles. it is a requirement that the offender is willing to take part in cosa and enters into a corresponding contract with the volunteers. the contract obliges the offender not to commit any more offences and not to keep any secrets. the group of sex offenders who are eligible for this has an average to high likelihood of re offending following detention or treatment. research in canada has established that by applying the cosa method the likelihood of re offending amongst sex offenders is percent less. in england pilot studies in hampshire and thames valley have observed a significant reduction in re offending. the close interrelationship with mappa see box above is characteristic of the english cosa projects. the mappps are ultimately responsible for supervising the sex offenders. in the nether lands it is possible that the pre requisites for the development of an approach similar to the cosa organisational model used in england are already in place. as a result of the establishment of safety houses see safety houses box in . . . an infrastructure for regional cooperation is being developed that is similar to the english map pa. furthermore a cosa pilot study has been launched in various cities in the netherlands. cities where this has been implemented included rotterdam breda and from the end of maastricht. the expectation is that poort p. . poort p. . poort p. . caspers . caspers et al. . wilson et al. . bates et al. . hoing et al. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur community based interventions such as cosa will be able to contribute to the reduction of re offending amongst sex offenders. the dutch probation and after care services believe that the possibility for long term proba tion and after care supervision is necessary for the successful application of these interventions see . . . with reference to problematic internet usage special conditions can also be enforced to restrict access to the internet see . . . technical means can also be used to try to counter the viewing of child abuse images or videos. software is in use that monitors the computer for language and content. on the one hand whether or not such solutions make sense is debatable. clinical psychologists doubt whether special conditions and therapies that are based on the full or partial absence of the internet are desirable since it is possible that this may send out a message to the convicted offender that he she is not able to have any control over his her behaviour. in the society of today it is barely possible to restrict internet traffic completely. at the same time this will increasingly turn out to be a bogus solution the internet is increasingly being offered for free at locations that the public has access to such as on board trains in catering establishments and shops. tablets and pre paid mobile telephones enable easy access to child abuse material which is almost impossible to monitor. in addition to these practical drawbacks judicial drawbacks surrounding the restriction of access to the internet are also referred to including a possible breach of the freedom of expression as stipulated in article of the european convention on human rights. on the other hand supervision is one of the main tasks of the probation and after care service and that supervision should therefore not be limited to the analogue world. registration and notification there are various ways in which the registration of convicted sex offenders can contribute to increasing public safety. it is possible that registration in itself may already be exerting a preventive effect since convicted sex offenders know that various institutions already have their eye on them. various institu finkelhor . dutch probation service p. . see www.securus software.com pdf monitoringoffenders.pdf viewed june in addition to this the company info excellente is developing an internet control desktop icd . the icd can be used within each variation of supervision alongside other technological facilities such as the electronic ankle band for example. the icd is a desktop containing hardware and software that ensures that the individual placed under supervision is able to use the internet without wi fi or wire connection. an internal key logger ensures that the test assessments are logged. the software that is supplied examines the data that is generated from this for keywords and websites visited. taylor quayle p. . gercke p. see also human rights guidelines for internet service providers from from the council of europe. see also article of the lanzarote convention regarding the collecting and storing of national data with regard to the identity and genetic profile dna about convicted sex offenders. on the basis of the dna testing convicted persons act dutch bulletin of acts and decrees and the decree of december regarding the amendment of the list of violent and sexual offences to which the dna testing convicted persons act applies dutch bulletin of acts and decrees. cellular material is taken from a convicted perpetrator due to an offence as described in articles b up to and including a b and f of the dutch criminal code for the purpose of determining the dna profile and the incorporation of this into a dna database. http www.securus software.com pdf monitoringoffenders.pdf implementation tions use registration systems for the implementation of their tasks in the phases described above. police records containing information about the offenders that come from the police are useful when carry ing out criminal investigations and the probation and after care services consult various registration systems for their own risk assessment purposes. furthermore registrations are used for prohibition and notification. the intention of prohibition is that the freedom of movement of the convicted sex offender is restricted for example preventing his her involvement in certain professions see . . and . . . a certificate of good conduct is also obligatory for some positions see . . primarily for professions that involve regular contact with children and particularly those professions which involve a dependency relationship. the ministry of education culture and science has stipulated for example that a primary school teacher a childminder and those who provide supervision between school hours must submit a certificate of good conduct. no statutory obligations apply to many other sectors. it may however be agreed that a certificate of good conduct must be requested and some organisations do this of their own accord. in order to be able to assess whether an individual has come into contact with the criminal justice system the central agency for certificates of good conduct centraal orgaan verklaring omtrent het gedrag covog makes use of various registers. the only documents used for this purpose are dutch judicial documents such as the criminal records system justitieel documentatie systeem jds police data and information from the public prosecution service and the probation and after care services. the intention is that in the future it will be possible to retrieve judicial information from eu ropean member states so as to prevent individuals who have been convicted for a sexual abuse offence elsewhere in europe from being able to work with children again for example in the netherlands. at the same time registrations can be used to notify individuals and institutions. since january certain groups of victims and or relatives have had the opportunity to be kept informed of progress in van montfoort consultancy firm the dutch probation service . for example an extract from the central judicial documentation register centraal justiteel documentatieregister cjd and data from the client monitoring system cli nt volg systeem cvs the system used by probation and after care services and or implementation programmes for preventive detention and other orders and sentences tenu itvoerleggingprogramma preventieve hechtenis en overige maatregelen en straffen tulp the system used by the prison system van marle mulder p. . parliamentary papers ii no. pp. . see wat is een verklaring omtrent het gedrag vog en wanneer heb ik een vog nodig what is a certificate of good conduct and why do i need a certificate of good conduct rijksoverheid central government www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen verklaring omtrent het gedrag vraag en antwoord wat is een ver klaring omtrent het gedrag vog en wanneer heb ik een vog nodig.html viewed august . parliamentary papers ii no. pp. . see onderzoek naar strafbaar gedrag research into behaviour that constitutes a criminal offence ri jksoverheid central government www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen verklaring omtrent het gedrag onderzoek naar strafbaar gedrag viewed august . on june the member states of the european union reached agreement about the text of the eu directive on combating sexual abuse sexual exploitation of children and child pornography. efforts have been made from the netherlands in order to make it possible by means of this directive that data exchange about sexual offences in other countries takes place as a matter of course. ontwikkelingen vog developments regarding certificates of good conduct press release from the ministry of security and justice july . the directive is not yet in force see . . http www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen verklaring omtrent het gedrag vraag en antwoord wat is een verklaring omtrent het gedrag vog en wanneer heb ik een vog nodig.html http www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen verklaring omtrent het gedrag vraag en antwoord wat is een verklaring omtrent het gedrag vog en wanneer heb ik een vog nodig.html http www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen verklaring omtrent het gedrag onderzoek naar strafbaar gedrag http www.rijksoverheid.nl onderwerpen verklaring omtrent het gedrag onderzoek naar strafbaar gedrag child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur relation to the judicial measure that was imposed. this applies in the case of victims relatives of of fenders for whom one of the following judicial measures has been imposed placement under a hospital order and placement in a young offenders institution. as of january the group of victims and or relatives of victims of offences which convey a right to speak or offences for which a custodial sentence of more than eight years can be imposed also have the opportunity to be kept informed of the course of the judicial measure that was imposed. the aim of this provision of information is to prevent un expected encounters between victims and or relatives and the offender concerned. citizens sometimes see it as their responsibility to warn local residents or if this takes place via the internet the general public about alleged offenders of sexual violence against children. this form of notification and forms of institutionalised community notification such as is the case in the united states may have an adverse effect on the possibilities for supervision and re integration. it may also increase the likelihood that a sex offender will try to remain out of sight. the administrative ex prisoner information service bestuurlijke informatie justitiabelen bij previously known as the provision of ad ministrative information to municipalities regarding ex prisoners bestuurlijke informatie gemeenten inzake ex gedetineerden bivgeg differs from the preceding flows of information that relate to the prevention of re offending as its activities are aimed at the prevention of social unrest. bij informs mayors if an individual who has committed a sexual abuse offence is returning to the municipality. this pilot study is described below. administrative ex prisoner information service the intention behind the administrative ex prisoner information service is to improve the avail ability of information to mayors hence improving the possibility to take action. within the pilotplus of the administrative ex prisoner information service the flow of information about sex offenders and those who have committed serious violent offences who are returning to a municipality is being tested and attempts are being made to gain an insight into how the flow of information functions within a municipality. municipalities are taking part in this pilotplus includ ing the largest municipalities. the municipalities that are taking part receive a notification from the legal information service justiti le informatiedienst two months before the offender returns to the municipality. this notification can be supplemented by information from the national po lice services korps landelijke politiediensten . on the basis of this information and in the interests of see www.om.nl onderwerpen slachtofferzorg detentieverloop en viewed august . see www.om.nl onderwerpen slachtofferzorg detentieverloop en viewed august . van marle mulder p. center for sex offender management b p. bogaerts van der woude . see text in the cosa box above. appendix to parliamentary papers ii no. . ministry of security and justice project bestuurlijke informatie justitiabelen bij actieplan pilotplus ad ministrative ex prisoner information service project pilotplus action plan january p. the pilotplus is an extension to the earlier pilot . including offenders of child pornography. in addition to sex offenders and offenders who have committed seriously violent offences individuals placed in young offenders institutions and individuals placed under a hospital order are also included in the pilot study. mayors are also informed of leave. http www.om.nl onderwerpen slachtofferzorg detentieverloop en http www.om.nl onderwerpen slachtofferzorg detentieverloop en implementation maintaining public order and ensuring safety the mayor is able to take measures. an example of a measure that can be taken within this framework involves accommodating the offender elsewhere within the municipality in order to prevent the victim from being confronted with the offender. the pilotplus is being evaluated in the second half of and if the outcome is positive the provision of information to municipalities will be implemented on a national scale in . . . youth offenders it is not only adults who are guilty of child pornography offences an average of of the suspects and of the convicted perpetrators are minors. as already described in . . child pornography offences committed by minors may involve the production distribution and possession of material involving children obtained by sexting for example and in addition to this they may also be involved in hands on sexual abuse also towards younger children. in the same way as adult offenders the group of offenders of sexual abuse towards children is not heterogeneous and the likelihood of re offending varies. the form and extent of after care and supervision of young offenders of sexual violence against children must naturally be brought into line with this. the current sub section does not contain an exhaustive descrip tion of after care and supervision measures for offenders who are minors and young adults. however it does briefly describe two aspects with regard to young offenders namely the treatment of young sex offenders and the youth probation and after care services. residential specialist treatment of young sex offenders the sexual behaviour of some young sex offenders is extremely inappropriate whereby it is often the case that serious underlying psychopathology is involved. in order to limit re offending as much as possible within this group residential treatment that is designed specifically to meet the needs of the offender is necessary in many cases. since the end of the s avenier has focused on developing treatment for youth sex offenders. the target group on which avenier focuses is boys aged twelve and over who have committed one or more sexual offences hands on or hands off and are subject to an increased or a very increased risk of re offending. in general these young people are characterised by a negative self image inadequate skills and depressive symptoms. in addition to this they are of ten victims of bullying and have sometimes even been abused themselves. although these young sex offenders have committed serious sexual offences on the basis of the above characteristics they are often considered to be pathetic children meaning that the risks that they pose to their surroundings are underestimated. although in the eyes of their family and friends treatment within a secure set ting that is focused on the sexual behaviour that is extremely inappropriate will sometimes seems too severe an intervention avenier believes that the underlying psychopathology is serious and that early parliamentary papers ii vi no. . see . . . figure . and figure . . van wijk pp. . see also . . . avenier is an institution for intensive youth care for approximately young people between the ages of and . the anker site in harreveld previously the harreveld young people s centre provides youth care plus secure phase with a high level of monitoring. young people with various problems can come here. within the safety of the secure environment they are able to work on their problems. there are two groups specifically aimed at young people with sexual problems. see www.desprengen. nl nl p cd ac c a locatie anker.html viewed august . schotel van der veer p. . http www.desprengen.nl nl p cd ac c a locatie anker.html http www.desprengen.nl nl p cd ac c a locatie anker.html child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur and targeted intervention has a preventive effect. the primary objective of the specialist treatment of young people with serious sexual problems is to reduce the likelihood of re offending by working on the development of the young people. treatment on offer is aimed towards the undesired sexu ally inappropriate behaviour and the underlying psychopathology whereby much attention is paid to recognising risk factors teaching alternative behaviours and introducing or creating protective fac tors. therapy takes place in group sessions as well as individually. up until young people with serious sexual problems placed under criminal and civil law were assigned to an avenier programme and treated at the anker site. since the division between youths placed under criminal and civil law was introduced boys who have been convicted under criminal law for committing a sexual offence and have received an order for placement in a young offenders institution can be placed in the den hey acker judicial youth institution. den hey acker has separate groups for young people with serious sexual problems. young people who display serious sexual problems but who have not been issued with a treatment order on the grounds of a criminal conviction can be placed in one of two groups for young people with serious sexual problems at the anker secure youth care centre on the basis of an authorisation for placement in secure youth care or under guardianship. it is highly important that treatment of young sex offenders continues to exist and that this is also considered and approached as a question of public healthcare. juvenile probation and after care services if within the youth justice system suspended sentences with a special condition are imposed the juve nile probation and after care service is assigned responsibility for supervision and counselling within the scope of a help and support measure. the process of after care can for example start at the time at which the young person is granted release from the pre trial detention is imposed with a suspended sentence or order receives an order to influence behaviour or leaves a judicial institution for young of fenders. the juvenile probation and after care service forms part of the youth care agency. a separate chapter in the handbook on the juvenile probation and after care method is devoted to young people who have committed sexual offences. treatment often in the form of group sessions sets out to address the deficits and needs displayed in the behaviour of specific offenders and attempts are made to provide the young people with strategies to prevent relapse. it is striking that in the handbook on the juvenile probation and after care method not a single reference is made to the role of the internet on criminal behaviour or on the relationship between sexual abuse and child pornography. although problematic online behaviour may be discussed in contact with clients and their parents in individual cases there has been no mention until now of structurally embedding the digital component in the treatment. schotel van der veer p. . schotel van der veer p. . see www.dji.nl organisatie locaties justitiele jeugdinrichtingen den hey acker index.aspx viewed august . see www.desprengen.nl nl p cffa e fa d professionals.html viewed august . article aa paragraph of the dutch criminal code. the juvenile probation service forms part of a youth care agency. vogelvang p. . vogelvang pp. . verbal information from the juvenile probation service june . http www.dji.nl organisatie locaties justitiele jeugdinrichtingen den hey acker index.aspx http www.desprengen.nl nl p cffa e fa d professionals.html implementation in contrast to probation and after care for adults the juvenile probation and after care service does not record the type of offence. this means that it cannot be discovered whether or not and if so the extent to which the juvenile probation service is involved with clients who have committed a child pornography offence and the interventions that were implemented in order to prevent clients from re offending. such a registration similar to the one used by the probation and after care service for adults would therefore be desirable. due to the fact that many young adults who receive help and support from the adult probation and after care service to help them observe the conditions of a suspended sentence do have a history of involvement with the juvenile probation service a good inter connection between the juvenile probation and after care service and the adult probation and after care service is necessary. this point was empha sised by the state secretary for security and justice in his letter of june and in addition to this he an nounced that the adult probation and after care service will further extend the specific attention it devotes to young adults. furthermore a new order entered into force on july as of that date the juvenile court can alongside the juvenile probation and after care service also designate the adult probation and after care service as being responsible for the support of the implementation of the behavioural order. . . probation and after care quantitative data this sub section contains statistical information about adult clients who were registered at the proba tion and after care services due to child pornography offences amongst others in . in individuals were registered in the client monitoring system of probation and after care ser vices for child pornography offences amongst others . n of these individuals had also committed another sexual offence. table . displays the context in which the clients with offenses related to child pornography were registered for one of the three probation and after care components. it is possible that one client is registered for multiple reasons. in this case probation and after care cases are involved with regard to individuals. www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publicaties persberichten wetten die per juli in werking treden.html viewed august . the juvenile probation and after care service does not make registrations centrally on the level of the criminal offence. either the dutch probation and after care services the salvation army or the netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care. together these three probation and after care components comprise the probation and after care services and make joint use of a single client monitoring system. the dutch probation and after care service has provided the figures at the request of bnrm. for the research justification refer to appendix justification of the research methods employed . probation and after care research. the explanation of the figures displayed in this chapter the ad ditional table presented in appendix and the statistics that are applicable to this can be found in appendix . an offence code is missing in of all recorded probation and after care assignments in . it is therefore possible that child pornography is involved in more cases than the clients that are stated. furthermore on the basis of the offence code no distinction is made between the posses sion distribution and production of child abuse images. in the event that at least one of the maximum of five recorded criminal codes in the client monitoring system concerns at least one of the following criminal codes . these numbers refer to the relevant article numbers of the dutch criminal code. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table . number of unique clients with offenses related to child pornography grouped according to the various reasons for registering with probation and after care services in reason for registering with probation and after care services categories are not mutually number of unique clients with offenses related to child pornography n referrals for assistance at an early stage requests for advice court session other supervision suspended sentence order for suspension conditional decision not to prosecute placement under a hospital order order for placement in a young offenders institution coordination of community service order behavioural interventions referral to care provision source the dutch probation and after care services information provided at the request of bnrm in the police registered different people at probation and after care services as a result of them being taken into custody for the offence of child pornography amongst other things. this does not the total of the number of unique clients with offenses related to child pornography from the various registration categories is not the same as the total number of probation and after care assignments in comparison to a total of probation and after care assignments . this is explained by the fact that a person may not only be included in various categories but may also come up more than once within the same category. for example re integration plan n suspension report court in chambers n bringing the sus pect before the supervisory judge n additional advice for the court session n preparation for detention under a hospital order with conditions n etc. the total number of unique clients with offenses related to child pornography that were registered with the probation and after care service due to a request for advice amongst other things n is not the same as the total of the sub categories stated n for the same reason as previously stated one person can come up more than once within the same category and in various sub categories . the total number of unique clients with offenses related to child pornography that were registered with the probation and after care service due to supervision amongst other things n is not the same as the total of the sub categories stated n for the same reason as previously stated one person can come up more than once within the same category and in various sub categories . the police registers all persons taken into police custody with the probation and after care service. the probation and after care service then decide whether or not to implement a visit to assist the suspect at an early stage dependent on various factors including time capacity and arrangements made on a district local level. implementation mean that the probation and after care services arranged a visit to assist at an early stage for all of these people. in any case most clients with offenses related to child pornography requested advice usually with regard to the court session. for just over a quarter of clients with offenses related to child pornography help and support was requested from the probation and after care services in order to assist with observance of the conditions imposed supervision . this usually took place within the scope of a partially suspended sentence as a part of which special conditions are imposed by the court. an order for suspension was sometimes n involved with regard to pre trial detention and occasion ally with regard to a suspended sentence n or supervision due to placement under a youth hospital order n . in clients with offenses related to child pornography were issued with a community service order amongst other things due to a child pornography offence. the probation and after care services are responsible for the coordination of community service orders that have been imposed. one client requested behavioural intervention and clients with offenses related to child pornography requested to be referred to care provision. tables . and . show the gender and age distributions of the clients with offenses related to child pornography at the time of intake by the probation and after care service . one single time with regard to a decision that was to be made about the pre trial detention or the decision not to prosecute. the component of probation and after care services provides advice on the basis of a diagnosis that they compile with the help of a risc risk assessment scale or quickscan. with the help of the risc the employee from probation and after care services determines the degree of the likelihood of re offending which factors increase the likelihood of re offending and which interventions are necessary in order to reduce the likelihood of this. in the case of sex offenders the static is used as an addition to the risc. the probation and after care organisations employ risc for extensive research see www.reclassering.nl viewed june . with the help of quickscan the employee from probation and after care services can determine the likelihood of reoffending in a short time the extent of responsiveness to behavioural change and whether or not it makes sense to initiate a course of probation and after care. the probation and after care organisations employ the quickscan as a first screening see the dutch probation service website www.reclassering.nl viewed june . the public prosecution service is responsible for supervising the observance of conditions see . . nevertheless supervision by the probation and after care service is usually the case. in the event of imposing a placement under a hospital order with conditions or if it involves a minor a conditional placement in a young offenders institution. the number of individuals that were sentenced in child pornography cases in in which amongst other things a community service order was imposed was suspended custodial sentence with a community service order suspended custodial sentence with a community service order community service order people source public prosecution service data see . . . a possible explanation for the fact that this number does correspond exactly with the number of people that were registered with the probation and after care services in for a community service order due to child pornography offences amongst other things according to probation and after care services and according to data from the public prosecution service is that not all of the judgments from have become final yet. http www.reclassering.nl http www.reclassering.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table . gender of clients with offenses related to child pornography n male female unknown total source the dutch probation service information provided at the request of bnrm table . age of clients with offenses related to child pornography during intake n years years years years total source the dutch probation service information provided at the request of bnrm most of the clients with offenses related to child pornography who registered with probation and after care services in and whose gender was recorded were men. the male female ratio is . approxi mately one fifth of the clients are under . just over half is aged between and and are older than . this gender and age distribution roughly corresponds with the gender and age distribution of persons convicted in the first instance in see . . . although fewer women are undergoing probation and after care relatively speaking. of the clients with offenses related to child pornography who were registered with probation and after care services in sufficient risc risk assessment scales data was recorded for clients. table . shows some of this data. export from may the most recent and satisfactory risc has been selected for each client. nb these unique people were registered with the probation and after care services due to referrals for assistance at an early stage requests for advice supervision orders community service orders behavioural intervention and guided referrals to care. implementation table . selection of the risc scores of clients with offenses related to child pornography in no. selected risc questions number of unique clients with offenses related to child pornography n . a previous conviction is involved adult criminal law . reason for the offence categories are not mutually exclusive sexual motivation addiction fulfilment of needs emotional state seeking sensation . client does not have permanent accommodation . client is currently unemployed . experience of close partner relationships from young adulthood onwards. had one or more close relationships had good and not so good relationships stuck in destructive patterns . current partner and family relationships mutual relationships relationships with some problems destructive relationships that are damaging to the parties involved . client has difficulties keeping going . client has psychological problems . client is socially awkward inept . client does not adequately understand the problem . client has no understanding of the behaviour that constitutes a criminal offence . client is not motivated to change source the dutch probation and after care service information provided at the request of bnrm over one third of the clients with offenses related to child pornography for whom risc data is available have already been convicted in the past as an adult. for more than three quarters of the clients sexual motivation gave rise to the offence. the emotional state played a role for a quarter of the clients. times the combination of sexual motivation and emotional state were involved. for two clients sensation was the only reason for the offence but this did play a role for people altogether. addiction is the only reason for the offence for five clients but this also played a part for other clients. just of the clients do not have permanent accommodation and approximately a third are currently unemployed. a fifth of the clients are stuck in destructive patterns and are currently in of the cases involved a combination with other categories. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur a destructive relationship. the majority of clients have difficulties keeping going and half have psychological problems. are socially awkward inept and are unable to understand the problems they have. a fifth have no understanding of their own criminal behaviour and are not motivated to change. please refer to appendix table b . for more risc data with regard to these clients with offenses related to child pornography. . . conclusion the judicial limits for the possibilities of supervision the possibilities for supervision that have been presented in this chapter focus specifically on supervi sion and after care within the judicial framework. this framework also has its limits. in the event that a custodial sentence is imposed with a term longer than four years no part of this may be suspended and special conditions cannot therefore be associated with this. supervision and after care are therefore also not possible in this form. supervision of a convicted sex offender can also no longer be provided after execution of the sentence. unless placement under a hospital order has been imposed if a convicted perpetrator has served their sentence or if the vi period has expired it is not now possible to enforce supervision and treatment within a judicial framework. from a scientific point of view it is regretted that there is no longer a compulsory framework for supervision and treatment. it is also interesting that the state secretary for security and justice has now indicated the need to carry out research into the pos sibility of extending life long supervision to the supervision of sex offenders who have completed their course of treatment under a hospital order. current approach towards after care and supervision an integrated approach surrounding convicted sex offenders is lacking. probation and after care the police the public prosecution service municipalities penal institutions the ministry of security and justice and the ministry of the interior and kingdom relations scenario teams safety houses the em ployee insurance agency the centre for work and income and community organisations such as housing associations and care institutions all play a role within the after care and supervision of convicted sex offenders and conflicts are sometimes unavoidable. for example an exclusion order issued by a mu nicipality to prevent social unrest can at the same time hinder probation and after care supervision. at the same time the institutions involved in the implementation are confronted with the complexity of the phenomenon of child pornography incomplete policies and problems in the implementation itself. in the course of their day to day work these institutions have to deal with analogue and digital aspects of convicted offenders various types of offenders high and low likelihood of re offending individuals who view as well as those who produce child abuse material and other dimensions of time and space convicted offenders who commit criminal offences online at night or who travel to other countries for long periods of time . the lack of a uniform national framework for the matter of after care and supervi this table also indicates how many values are missing per question. article a of the dutch criminal code. in the event that a custodial sentence is ordered with a maxi mum term of two years the court is able to order that the sentence is not carried out either with regard to the whole sentence or for a part of it. if the custodial sentence that is ordered has a term of more than two years and a maximum of four years only a part of the custodial sentence may be imposed in the form of a suspended sentence. see . . . implementation sion of convicted offenders means that the regions need to learn how to deal with the above challenges themselves a number of successful initiatives have been described in this chapter. initiatives in the region collaborative associations such as safety houses scenario teams and dual track or multiple track teams exist in individual regions in the netherlands in which involved institutions come together. those in volved on the front line of such initiatives frequently state that the british supervision system mappa is desirable whilst in the same breath referring to the dutch safety houses and dutch implementation of the cosa project. central control by the probation and after care service is a component of mappa on a case level. the starting points formulated by the american center for sex offender management see below also seem to be of value to the dutch situation these starting points are encountered in the implementation in various regions. the amsterdam sexual abuse case is an example of sharing best practices where lessons learnt from the sexual abuse case of the swimming teacher from den bosch turned out to be valuable when it was a matter of informing parents and victims and preventing social unrest. the action plan to tackle child abuse also propagates co operation and an integrated approach. however this plan is aimed specifically at children and states the importance of co operation with organisations aimed at offenders but this is as yet not widely found in the region. an integrated approach an integrated approach is desirable and must be required to fulfil a number of conditions. the integrated character of the approach should become apparent through the coordination of all processes organisa tions involved judicial frameworks and requirements in order to promote a focus on the victim the moni toring and evaluation of interventions specialised knowledge and the training of employees raising pub lic awareness and co operation between organisations. the integrated character of the approach should also emerge from a programme of measures that takes shape on both a national as well as a regional level. this also means mutual coordination between the regions the problem does not disappear if the offender moves house or if an exclusion order is imposed it simply moves elsewhere. a national programme and or expertise centre as part of the dutch probation and after care services as in the united states could form a national policy framework and can serve as a key link between policy and implementation can collect best practices in the region and can link up with similar programmes and expertise centres within detection and prosecution programme of improvements in tackling child pornography in order to promote such an integrated approach. it is important that the specific problems surrounding youth sex offenders are also included. it is therefore not only a matter of youth sex offenders in the criminal justice chain but also those offenders who are treated under the forms of civil law. the organisation registration and generation of expertise within the juvenile probation and after care services are also matters that require attention. . victim assistance . . introduction this report is focused on child pornography within the wider context of sexual violence against children. the most important factor in that regard is protecting children from sexual abuse. a necessary com the protection of children from sexual violence is also the rationale of the criminalisation of child pornography in article b of the dutch criminal code see . . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur ponent of this is providing assistance to victims of child pornography. this assistance is related to the various forms within which the phenomenon of child pornography arises. it is important to distinguish between the production of child abuse material on the one hand and the distribution possession and viewing of such material on the other hand. children can be victims of sexual abuse whereby an as pect of child pornography is involved due to the fact that visual material of this abuse is also produced. in addition to this children may become victims as a result of the distribution possession and viewing of material constituting child pornography. the individual becomes a victim when he she experiences the consequences of being forced to act as an object in the material that constitutes child pornography. an important part of providing assistance to victims of the production of material constituting child pornography involves the overall provision of assistance to victims of abuse. within the scope of this report it is only possible to provide an overview of this. this is the reason why the focus is placed on the provision of assistance for the elements specifically associated with being a victim of child pornography. an important point that requires attention when providing assistance is to take account of the conse quences of the persistent existence of images and the distribution possession and viewing of images. another central point is offering assistance to children in the age group from twelve to eighteen years who are victims of various types of digital sexual violence by means of the internet particularly in so far as this involves material constituting child pornography. furthermore it is also important to pay atten tion to the aspect of being a victim with respect to the parents of children involved. the abuse of their child who at a young age is certainly entirely dependent on them can be particularly traumatising for them. if images of the abuse are made they may in time come to realise the permanency of the situation that involves their child being a victim. in the case of very young victims child abuse images can sometimes be the only evidence that abuse has taken place. this material as well as other digital indications of sexual abuse such as chat conversations and links to websites are not only important when it comes to detection but also for the provision of assistance in order to be able to interpret signs of sexual abuse more effectively. one example of a case which prominently involves both sexual abuse as the production of child abuse material and the possession and subsequent distribution of those images is the amsterdam sexual abuse case. in this case the provision of assistance was involved from the very beginning and therefore played a very important role. on the basis of this case the extent in which the aspect relating to child pornography received attention in the provision of assistance to parents and children will be discussed. at the end of this chapter some conclusions will be drawn. . . provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse as the production of material constituting child pornography almost always involves sexual abuse the provision of assistance is aimed at the consequences of this abuse in particular. sexual abuse is a type see also . and . . . see also . . . with the exception of parents who are also offenders. von weiler et al. . see also . . implementation of child abuse. assistance can be sought from medical and standard basic facilities and victim support. specific facilities also exist for victims of sexual violence and abuse who are minors. in addition to this assistance can also be received for example at one of the referral based top specialist trauma centres for children and young people . the ways in which provision of assistance is organised in the netherlands the various types of co operation and examples from other countries that can pro vide a guide for the establishment of integrated provision of assistance will be discussed below. the health council of the netherlands included the topic of child abuse in its programme for in which it indicated that in some cases children are severely traumatised as a result of abuse including sexual abuse. the council emphasised the fact that this places high demands on the care on offer and the provision of assistance but that politicians and victims and their families have referred to a lack of effective treatment and supervision. in a report on child abuse that was subsequently published the council referred to the fact that substantial investments have been made in the prevention identifica tion and reporting of child abuse over the past years which have resulted in an increased awareness of the severity and complexity of this major social problem. with regard to dealing with the consequences of child abuse the council established however that few proven effective methods of treatment ex ist throughout the world and that in the netherlands the provision of assistance is also fragmented. in the report the council presented a model for a multi disciplinary approach to both the diagnosis assessment as well as the treatment of victims of child abuse which involved a large number of as sessments associated with the various aspects and domains which in the opinion of the council also need to be involved in both the assessment and the treatment. integrated approach towards tackling child abuse in its report on child abuse the council states that an integrated approach towards child abuse and co operation between various institutions within this framework are essential. a number of examples of multi disciplinary co operation and integrated programmes from other countries are described in the box below. the youth care act describes the sexual abuse of children as a form of child abuse see . . the proto col of the youth care agencies and the child abuse counselling and reporting centre of amsterdam and north holland cites child pornography as a form of child abuse. various organisations exist that focus upon child abuse such as the child abuse counselling and re porting centres and the confidential doctors for child abuse. such as the family doctor municipal health service netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care and the reflection and action groups to tackle child abuse. victim support provides judicial practical and emotional support to victims of abuse road accidents and disasters and also plays an important role in making referrals to emergency organisations www. slachtofferhulp.nl viewed august . an example of this are the elker groups in groningen that help children in the and age groups and their parents to come to terms with the sexual abuse. designated as such by the national centre for chronic traumatisation in early childhood landelijk centrum voor vroegkinderlijke chronische traumatisering lvct . the health council of the netherlands p. . the health council of the netherlands . the health council of the netherlands pp. . http www.slachtofferhulp.nl http www.slachtofferhulp.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur children s advocacy centre the children s advocacy centre model cac originated outside the netherlands and forms a good example of multi disciplinary co operation in combating sexual violence against children. this model includes a facilities programme which involves representatives from various disciplines making mutual decisions about the investigation the prosecution of offenders and the care of victims in the event of child abuse. the model was developed in the united states and imple mented at over locations there and was as a rule tailored to the local circumstances. based on the cacs six locations have also been established in sweden as part of a pilot backed by the swedish government. these locations named barnahus take care of co operation between social services the police the public prosecution service specialists in forensic medicine and the psychiatric services. the collaboration takes place from the start of the research up to and including the provision of assistance and after care to victims of sexual violence amongst other things. as starting points the barnahus centres apply a child oriented approach a child friendly environ ment multi disciplinary co operation all experts under the same roof the limiting of the number of interviews with children and a better quality of the investigation. amongst other things this results in a greater number of decisions to prosecute. ceop the child exploitation and online protection centre ceop in the united kingdom is dedicated to eradicating the sexual abuse of children including online abuse. a comprehensive approach is employed for this purpose. the centre is part of the police force in the uk and works in close collaboration with other investigation services including those from other countries to catch sex offenders. in addition to this the ceop centre works closely with organisations from the field of youth protection such as the national society for the prevention of cruelty to children as well as international technology companies such as serco and microsoft. ceop collects information about offenders victims and technological developments and makes these available in the form of programmes and training sessions. many examples of collaborative partnerships in the field of child abuse exist in the netherlands. the final report on the regional plan to tackle child abuse cites amongst others a care team operating in the region of nijmegen consisting of the youth care agency social services the netherlands insti tute for psychological care and addiction care for youths the police youth and sexual abuse cases and youth healthcare. the role of the team is to co ordinate and provide assistance in complex cases of child sexual abuse. the approach employed by the team is directed towards the whole family. other examples cited in the final report include the groningen co operative partnership against sexual violence in which various institutions that provide assistance work together in the city and province www.nationalcac.org viewed august . str m k. rejmer a. . www.ceop.police.uk viewed augustus . in this connection see also . which includes a description of forms of collaboration within the framework of the supervision and guidance of sex offenders. kooijman et al. . www.shginfo.nl viewed august . http www.nationalcac.org http www.ceop.police.uk http www.shginfo.nl implementation of groningen and the sexual abuse support centres of the municipal health service in amsterdam and the hague . besides these examples the so called dual track or multiple track team can also be cited which operates in amsterdam and is also specifically geared towards sexual abuse. in this team representatives from various organisations work together to provide advice about the approach in a broad sense for tackling sexual abuse. each professional can put a question to the team about suspected child abuse. the basic idea is that assistance must be provided along multiple tracks at the same time to the victim the non abusing parents and the offender. parties involved in this include amongst others the child abuse counselling and reporting centre the youth care agency the police the child care and protection board as well as the institutions that offer assistance which include amsta de bascule the nether lands institute for psychological care and addiction care ingeest mee amstel and zaan and puntp. the korpsmonitor kinderporno states that in a number of police districts collaborations with institutions that offer assistance take place as a matter of procedure but does not explicitly state what form these col laborations takes. after being asked about this within the scope of this report a representative from one of the sexual abuse teams from the utrecht regional police force indicated that the police simply refer victims of sexual abuse who are youths to the trauma centre of the wilhemina kinderziekenhuis children s hospital of the university medical centre utrecht . according to the representative from the police this usually takes place as a result of interventions from the youth care agency or one of the christian assistance organisations such as steps. the representative also indicated that victims of sexual abuse of fences in utrecht are usually assigned a so called joss lawyer. however a structure for collaboration with organisations that provide assistance is not included in the report on child pornography arising from the korpsmonitor which includes a proposal for creation of a national organisation to combat child pornography and child sex tourism. in addition to collaborative partnerships such as those stated above a number of initiatives also exist that aspire to a more far reaching collaborative partnership in which various experts intend to achieve a complete provision of assistance under one roof. two initiatives are described in the box below. one of the examples cited in the report from the health council of the netherlands concerns the multi disciplinary centre for child abuse in friesland in formation . the initiator fier frysl n states that the aim is to achieve an integrated approach with various experts under the same roof. the care institution has announced that the team would have to be made up of experts from the child abuse counselling and reporting centre the domestic violence counselling and support point the www.gezond.amsterdam.nl geestelijke gezondheid seksueel geweld viewed august . www.denhaag.nl home bewoners to regionaal steunpunt seksueel geweld rssg.htm viewed august . tmt . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . verbal information representative of one of the sexual abuse teams from the regional police force utrecht may . juridische opvang slachtoffers seksueel geweld legal support for victims of sexual violence programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . project het mishandelde kind centraal stellen placing the focus on the abused child fier frysl n . http www.gezond.amsterdam.nl geestelijke gezondheid seksueel geweld http www.denhaag.nl home bewoners to regionaal steunpunt seksueel geweld rssg.htm child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur youth care agency youth services therapists specialised in trauma and system treatments youth section netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care the child care and pro tection board guardianship a forensic paediatrician hospital and a forensic interviewer from the police. according to fier frysl n it is intended that a lawyer a developer of methodology and a special professor will be associated with the centre and that the dutch forensic institute and the netherlands youth institute the addiction services or the netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care will also be involved if necessary. in a specialised sexual violence centre will be launched in utrecht for victims of all ages who have been indecently assaulted or raped. according to protocol various disciplines will also work together under one roof in this centre the police forensic doctors nurses and psycho social assis tance. the centre was inspired by ceop in great britain and the cacs in sweden see box above . combining care for offenders with the provision of assistance to victims is characteristic of a number of the initiatives described above. in this connection the tilburg safety house can also be cited. this is a collaborative association consisting of a large number of organisations in which safety and care are com bined under one roof through a family based approach involving a combination of measures in the form of criminal law care for offenders and the provision of assistance to victims. from the perspective of after care for offenders of sexual abuse as well the perspective of the victim is taken into consideration and the outcome is the combination of care for offenders and the provision of assistance to victims. . . provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse within the context of child pornography with regard to the focus of this report it is important to establish whether or not the provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse who are minors is also aimed at providing assistance to victims of offences related to child pornography. no recent research has been carried out into practice in the netherlands with regard to this point. a study was however carried out in by the working group child pornography and child prostitution in the netherlands. on the matter of the treatment of vic tims of child pornography this report began by remarking that at that time the provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse in general left a lot to be desired and that up until that point there existed few opportunities for supervising and providing therapy for young children who were victims of sexual abuse either in a family setting or elsewhere. supervision and therapy were usually limited to regular forms of therapy even though it had already emerged from scientific research that only therapy that is specifically directed at abuse is effective according to the report. the report also indicated that the pro vision of assistance to the parents of abused children still did not form a part of the assistance on offer. the working group subsequently described the situation for the victims of child pornography as even worse at that time nothing was known about treatment of these victims and even fewer opportunities for treatment were available. www.umcutrecht.nl zorg viewed august . midden brabant care and safety house one of the many safety houses in the netherlands. www.tilburg.veiligheidshuis.org viewed august see . . . for a more detailed description of this safety house. see . . working group on child pornography and child prostitution in the netherlands . http www.umcutrecht.nl zorg http www.tilburg.veiligheidshuis.org implementation within the scope of detection bnrm carried out research into the extent to which the child abuse counselling and reporting centres included the aspect of child pornography as part of their role in detection. it emerged that child pornography was still barely recognised as an additional dimension of being a victim of child abuse even within child abuse counselling and reporting centres. as far as the provision of assistance is concerned bnrm spoke with a number of key figures and analysed a num ber of programmes. it emerged for example that the provision of assistance is not being put forward explicitly in the context of child pornography in the initiatives described above. in its recommendations on child abuse the health council of the netherlands did not refer to either a digital component or to an aspect relating to child pornography within the context of providing assistance to victims of sexual abuse. child pornography is not listed in the plans for the multi disciplinary centre for child abuse in friesland. the centre for sexual violence that is currently being established in utrecht considers child abuse images to be an important topic when asked but will in the first instance focus solely on providing first line assistance to victims of sexual abuse without involving a possible aspect relating to child pornography in that regard. there is no evidence of treatment of cases involving victims of child pornography on the website of the specialised institutions offering assistance that participate in the dual track or multiple track team in amsterdam. the websites of certain key organisations such as the child care and protection board and the munici pal health service devote just as little attention to child pornography. the vision document produced by the netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care for the netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care for youths also fails to name child abuse material. the head from one of the sexual abuse teams from the utrecht regional police force who was interviewed indicated that his team was in most cases involved with one off experiences of sexual abuse the few cases involving child abuse material with a victim had usually been related to cases of incest without material having been distributed or to accusations of the possession of child abuse images within the scope of divorce problems. he reported that his team considers the production of child abuse material to be subsidiary to the abuse and also primarily considers the victim as being a victim of the sexual of fence. according to the head of the sexual abuse team the referral for assistance and also the assistance itself are focused on this. recently research in the form of an audit was carried out in germany in which professionals in the provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse were asked about their experiences with child pornography. in their responses the respondents only drew on their own actual experience with child pornography to a limited extent a substantial part of the findings are based on estimations derived from their expertise. despite this limitation this research project did produce valuable information. see . . . . the health council of the netherlands p. . project het mishandelde kind central stellen placing the focus on the abused child fier frysl n . written information june . www.amsta.nl www.debascule.com www.meeaz.nl www.puntp.nl viewed august . netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care . verbal information provided by the head of one of the sexual abuse teams from the utrecht regional police force may . von weiler et al. . http www.amsta.nl http www.debascule.com http www.meeaz.nl http www.puntp.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur one of the conclusions that can be drawn from the audit is that child abuse material does not play a major role in most treatments provided to the victims of abuse. most care providers indicated amongst other things that they have hardly had any contact or have had no contact whatsoever with child pornography. during therapy for sexual abuse any material that may have been pro duced of this abuse was rarely discussed. the care workers estimated the direct consequences of the abuse as being more acute and more severe and had usually not even thought about the possible existence of images. furthermore the care workers expressed doubts about the permis sibility of bringing up the possibility that footage of the abuse was made due to the risk of this resulting in further traumatising the child and their parents. in some cases they indicated that they personally sense a barrier to start doing this or that they consider it to be the responsibility of the authorities involved in detection. according to the care workers in the cases in which the existence of images was brought to the fore this was not a priority for many victims during the course of the treatment because the vic tims were not yet aware of the implications of this and because other matters such as unleashed emotions or problematic family relationships had required greater attention. according to the care workers young children are not able to take stock of the consequences of the existence of images and parents only slowly start to gain an understanding of the permanency of this aspect of being a victim and the implications that it entails. . . provision of assistance to victims of the distribution possession and viewing of child abuse material it is not only the production of material constituting child pornography that creates victimhood but also the distribution and possession of such material. research carried out in germany into the pro vision of assistance to revealed that the existence of visual material of the abuse leads to additional problems for victims at a later stage in their lives the images themselves give rise to shame and feel ings of guilt and the fact that the images have been distributed and can no longer be deleted from the internet leads to feelings of powerlessness. the care workers also indicated that victims can be afraid of the perception on the part of others that they voluntarily participated in the realisation of the images. the study clearly explains that for the above reason victims find it very difficult to achieve closure. specific assistance needs to be provided for these types of victims. the german care workers who were interviewed who deal with victims of sexual abuse presumed that a component relating to child por nography often leads to a more far reaching dissociation and a greater likelihood of post traumatic stress syndrome ptss and that additional diagnostic and treatment competencies are necessary for this which they usually do not possess. the majority indicated that they have no knowledge of the way in which victims deal with the permanent character of victimhood and do not therefore possess the treatment techniques for this. the information provided revealed that care workers also develop feel ings of powerlessness and hopelessness whenever they devote attention to the permanent character of victimhood during treatment. they are also unable to comply with the most important request for help of victims namely the removal of the material. von weiler et al. . ibidem. implementation it is necessary that assistance is also available for children aged between twelve and eighteen who have become victims of sexual violence on or via the internet including the distribution possession and viewing of child abuse material. this may involve for example material that was produced by the children themselves but distributed by others or situations in which children were made to produce material of themselves via the internet or to allow this material to be produced by others via a webcam. some reporting sites and chat sites are available on the internet for children in the older age group such as help wanted ikzitindeshit and internetsoa which explicitly name the topic of online sexual violence. other sites aimed at this age group such as question zone hulpmix and pratenonline do not do this. it is likely that children who have become victims of online sexual violence via the internet find answers to questions on such online services and specifically on the websites that devote attention to this subject. of course the extent to which these websites can actually be used to find a way to provide adequate assistance is not yet known. . . the amsterdam sexual abuse case in the foregoing the provision of assistance has been approached from the point of view of care workers who are involved with children who are victims of sexual abuse. the point under discussion was whether or not care workers also take possible online sexual violence into consideration for example by bringing up the issue of whether or not images of the abuse were also made and distributed and if so whether assistance is also provided for this aspect of being a victim. two recent major sexual abuse cases included a significant child pornography component in the sense that images of the sexual abuse were produced. in the case of benno l. it emerged that the images were made for personal possession. however in addition to the production and possession of images the amsterdam sexual abuse case also involved the distribution of these images. the following sections will consider how this aspect was addressed within the scope of the provision of assistance. prelude the benno l. case after it became clear that it was possible that the benno l. case involved the abuse of children on a large scale the decision was made to involve the regional medical care organisations geneeskundige hulpver see . . . the hotline combating child pornography on the internet and the kindertelefoon where children and adults can report online sexual abuse www.helpwanted.nl links.htm www.kindertelefoon.nl www. meldpunt kinderporno.nl melding viewed august . site that refers users to the services provided by victim support www.ikzitindeshit.nl tot jaar pageid lb true viewed august . this is a site run by korrelatie www.question zone.nl viewed august . this is a site run by the regional institute for outpatient mental healthcare www.pratenonline.nl viewed august . see also table . and table . in . . . at least no indications have been found to suggest that l. also distributed the images. the amsterdam sexual abuse case. see . . for the various forms of being a victim. http www.helpwanted.nl links.htm http www.kindertelefoon.nl http www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl melding http www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl melding http www.ikzitindeshit.nl tot jaar pageid lb true http www.question zone.nl http www.pratenonline.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur leningsorganisatie in de regio in the three way consultation. from this consultation it was subsequently decided that the psycho social provision of assistance to victims should be regarded as the dominant topic. the organisation of large scale assistance was put into the hands of the regional medical care organisations victim support and the netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care. much attention was devoted to involving and informing the parents of the children who may have been involved. although the organisations involved constantly endeavoured to put the needs of victims and parents first parents criticised the fact that they were not always the first to be informed about new facts and circumstances. tension arose between the ministry of justice and the municipalities regarding the level of openness to be observed and between the ministry of justice and the regional medical care organisations regarding the extent to which discussions with victims could take place within the field of the provision of assistance taking the possible consequences of this for detection into consideration. the organisation of the provision of assistance the amsterdam sexual abuse case also extended the three way consultation to a four way consultation in which the municipal health service was involved in addition to the mayor the police and the pub lic prosecution service. this consultation prioritised the provision of information to parents and the provision of assistance. following careful preparation and selection over a number of days the parents were invited to closed meetings where they were informed of the suspected abuse of their children and were offered help. the case was only made public after this had taken place. the municipal health service organised and co ordinated the provision of assistance. the sexual abuse support centres of the municipal health service in amsterdam supervised the process of the provision of assistance. the actual assistance was provided by the municipal health service departments youth health care vangnet jeugd youth safety net and vangnet advies advice safety net and various regional assistance organisa tions such as arkin the netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care ingeest and the salvation army. the trauma centre for child and family in amsterdam which was specialised in abuse and maltreatment was also involved in the case this centre was set up by the netherlands insti tute for psychological care and addiction care ingeest and the academic medical centre university of amsterdam. in order to respond to questions that parents may have about changes to the behaviour of their child or physical or psychosomatic complaints a central telephone number was opened linked to a call centre. the municipal health service then took care of allocating the appropriate types of assistance. individual diag nostics group treatment and individual treatment were offered to children and personal supervision to parents. the municipal health service also informed all gps about the main aspects of the case. all parents who indicated that they required assistance were assigned a so called family detective. this official from the police was also able to put the parties involved in touch with the appointed care workers. the family detec tive remained available for as long as the parents were involved in the criminal proceedings and victim www.ggdhartvoorbrabant.nl viewed september . cot crisis research team . it is feared that witnesses may be influenced cot crisis research team . hoe de amsterdamse zedenzaak aan het rollen kwam how the ball got rolling in the amsterdam sexual abuse case volkskrant march . site of the municipal health service in amsterdam www.gezond.amsterdam.nl viewed august . http www.ggdhartvoorbrabant.nl http www.gezond.amsterdam.nl implementation support would take over this role after that. for the provision of assistance use was made of the assis tance on offer in amsterdam. the care that was provided was not specifically arranged with the intention that it would cease again when the individual s involvement in the criminal proceedings came to an end. the mayor and aldermen of amsterdam announced that the victims and parents involved would be able to receive assistance for many years in order to process their experiences. they also indicated that the intensive emergency assistance would be continued until after the criminal proceedings had been completed. provision of assistance with regard to victims of child pornography discussions were carried out with employees from the amsterdam municipal health service in order to determine how the provision of assistance in the context of child pornography was handled in the amsterdam sexual abuse case. amongst other things they reported that the municipal health service actually had no previous experience of cases in which child abuse material played a part. at the most ma terial constituting child pornography was found in a flat by coincidence referring this to the police was then sufficient. as far as this is concerned the amsterdam sexual abuse case certainly forms an excep tion. the employees indicated that they had experienced difficulties with many cases of abuse but that the employees had not been aware of the fact that child abuse images could have played a part in this. they reported that in the event of abuse children in amsterdam were examined physically psychologi cally and forensically a so called direction group comprising experts on sexual violence against children from the municipal health service the netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care and the academic medical centre university of amsterdam where an assessment is made regarding the help that is necessary. according to the employees the essence of the municipal health service s involvement in this involves referral to a care provision. according to the employees communication with the parents formed an important factor. they indicated that partly on the basis of experiences from the benno l. case the decision was made to always inform the parents of possible victims of new facts or developments first of all. a screening of the parents and employees of the day nurseries involved took place in order to determine the extent to which treatment was required. furthermore the employees stated that the decision was made to make use of the regular treatment on offer in amsterdam essentially consisting of a number of modules in the amsterdam sexual abuse case as well. however they referred to the fact that the aspect of child pornography had also been new for these care workers. in this connection the employees also asked what the distinctive elements or signals are of a case of abuse of which images have been made. in sexual abuse cases the provision of assistance is specifically aimed at disrupting the family as little as possible according to the employees from the municipal health service the impact of the abuse on the children is in the main linked to the question as to the extent to which parents remain capable of providing a safe environment for the child. in the amsterdam sexual abuse case it was therefore recommended for example for the parents not to see the images of their children. on the one hand parents want to know what has happened to mayor and aldermen of amsterdam municipal council report january . mayor and aldermen of amsterdam municipal council report january . team leader and psychiatrist first line medical practitioner vangnet advies safety net advice amsterdam municipal health service june . see . . for the identification of victims of sexual abuse. this presents a very difficult dilemma for parents because on the one hand they want to know every thing in detail e.g. was the child in pain was the child awake child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur their child but on the other hand seeing the images can negatively influence the relationship between parent and child. the municipal health service employees also stated that this case forms a reason to be more alert to child abuse material in other files. they considered it desirable to raise awareness amongst municipal health service employees and care workers regarding the opportunity to pick up more indications of possible child abuse material. according to them this process would not be entirely straightforward they refer to the fact that picking up indications of sexual abuse against children in general is still problematic. furthermore the employees indicated that there are limitations to the number of tasks with which care workers in the field can be burdened. the mayor and aldermen of amsterdam ordered the gunning committee to carry out research into the amsterdam sexual abuse case. however the research assignment did not involve the aspect of provision of assistance. . . conclusion recognising the dimension of being a victim of child pornography offences considering the various aspects involved in being a victim of child pornography offences the provision of assistance is necessary in relation to the consequences of both the production of child abuse material as well as the distribution possession and viewing of that material. production usually always involves sexual abuse. general and specialist facilities are available to provide such assistance for young children older children and parents of children. however the provision of assistance is barely designed for the possibility that the abuse takes place within the context of child pornography. there is little awareness of the possibility that the sexual abuse of children goes hand in hand with the production of images of this abuse and that this forms an additional dimension of being a victim of sexual abuse which requires integrated treatment. lack of specific knowledge associated with this little is also known about the consequences of the distribution and possession of child abuse material for the children who are victims of this and for their parents and few programmes of assistance exist that are directed at these aspects of being a victim. in more general terms there is only a limited amount of specific knowledge about being a victim of sexual violence via the internet and about the inter relatedness that may exist between sexual abuse and online sexual violence. besides a few reporting and chat sites on the internet little in the way of assistance is on offer for victims of online sexual violence in the age group from twelve years upwards. online offline connection the system of care provision needs to form connections between offline and online forms of being a vic tim of sexual abuse and expertise needs to be built up with regard to effective methods and techniques for the treatment of the consequences of online sexual violence. gunning et al. . the assignment read to investigate all facts and circumstances with reference to the ques tion as to how the possible abuse of children in the day nurseries concerned and via the internet child minding service s concerned could have taken place implementation . public private sector partnerships in the netherlands in the matter of child pornography . . introduction the nature of the internet means that comprehensive and central control is not possible and that tech nological developments succeed one another at an extremely rapid pace. in tackling child pornography on the internet the government is faced by challenges involving capacity knowledge and resources. the private sector is supporting the government in its public role of tackling child pornography on international european and national levels. public private sector partnerships pps form a means to accomplish this. a public private sector partnership in the field of safety is based on the collaboration between private and public parties with an approach that involves a clear distribution of responsibilities tasks and competences on the basis of mutually agreed objectives a hierarchical relationship between the parties does not exist. the common intention of public and private ac tors involved in tackling child pornography is clear to prevent and combat child pornography and victims of this offense. in . . it will emerge that public private sector partnerships are in practice unmanageable in their efforts to tackle child pornography as various actors are involved who all have different views on tackling child pornography on the internet. a consultative body that brings together the whole arena of the forces at play that are concerned with this problem such as was established at the time that the possible blocking of websites concerning child abuse material was intended would therefore be desirable. in . . the fact that collaborations in the netherlands and other countries also exist that do not involve such forums will be described. although the precise direction that public private partnerships will take in order to tackle child pornography has not been formulated this will be derived from current collaborations and literature. for this reason a possible focus on public private partnerships and associated strategies will be described in . . . this focus and the associated strate gies complement the focus of the police the public prosecution service and the ministry of security and justice. the potential of public private partnerships in the matter of child pornography is large. for this reason it is advisable to safeguard and further develop dutch public private sector partnerships in this field . . . the number of pending child pornography cases has been high for many years . parliamentary papers ii vi no. knowledge regarding digital technology falls short in certain gov ernmental divisions. stol p. programme of improvements in tackling child pornography p. . the rio de janeiro declaration and call for action to prevent and stop sexual exploitation of children and adolescents . third world congress against sexual exploitation of children and adolescents rio de janeiro brazil november see www.ecpat.net worldcongressiii pdf outcome wciii outcome document final.pdf viewed august . article of the convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention lanzarote october treaty series www.europa nu. nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissaris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj viewed may . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography p. . definition taken from pel et al. p. . http www.ecpat.net worldcongressiii pdf outcome wciii outcome document final.pdf http www.europa nu.nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissaris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj http www.europa nu.nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissaris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . . interplay of forces in public private sector partnerships public private sector partnerships are able to make a substantial contribution towards the tackling of child pornography. as described below the partnerships can cause tension between the different forces at play comprising the government private sector ngos and internet community as these actors have their own views as to which model of internet governance should be used to combat child por nography on the internet. internet governance the internet provides many positive opportunities for users but can also have negative consequences such as the distribution of child abuse material. combating cybercrime and illegal content including child abuse material is a matter of internet governance. one of the functions of internet governance is to develop a policy that is focussed on the users of the internet and not on the technology as such. since the internet now has an international cross border character internet governance takes place via multilateral actors including international organisations. multiple models of internet governance currently exist side by side. the cyber authority model is based on the notion that there need to be central points in order to keep the internet clean. these services could for example disconnect individual computers or parts of the internet or put these into quarantine . another approach is the self cleaning internet model which involves a community of volunteers systematically recording and monitoring threats and vulnerabilities. since internet par ticipants gain insights and trouble into and from these harmful elements they also develop and implement countermeasures themselves. in addition to this the model of economic market forces exists based on the idea that internet governance can be best achieved by market mechanisms and private partners. in addition to legislation and regulations a variety of ideas exist within the realm of government which link in with the first model such as blocking child abuse material and the possible establishment of mathiason et al. p. defines internet governance as follows collective action by governments and or the private sector operators of the networks connected by the internet to establish agreements about the standards policies rules and enforcement and dispute resolution procedures to apply to global internetworking activities. report of the working group on internet governance p. . mathiason et al. pp. . a similar formal institution is the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers icann which is responsible for issuing top level domain names such as.nl and. com. the issuing of the.xxx domain name by icann is directed specifically at adult pornographic websites so that it is easier to monitor such websites see why icann s approval of the xxx domain is an important precedent by milton mueller march blog.internetgovernance.org blog ar chives .html viewed june . solum . www.nligf.nl index.php agenda p publiek debat internet governance controleren of vertrou wen viewed may . www.nligf.nl index.php agenda p publiek debat internet governance controleren of vertrou wen viewed may . solum pp. . http blog.internetgovernance.org blog archives .html http blog.internetgovernance.org blog archives .html http www.nligf.nl index.php agenda p publiek debat internet governance controleren of vertrou ad wen http www.nligf.nl index.php agenda p publiek implementation international european and national cyber security centres. private parties do not want legisla tion and regulations and interventions against child pornography to affect their services on the internet and create high costs but wish them to come into being because the market wants them to. at the same time digital civil rights movements and the internet community are involved in the debate on internet governance. they are generally propagating ideas based on the principle of a self cleaning internet . these actors are not represented in consultative bodies such as the internet safety platform but are actively considering various ideas for measures to tackle child pornography. from the discus sion about blocking websites involving child abuse material it comes to the fore that this interplay of forces in the area of internet governance also plays a role in the combating of child abuse material on the internet. interplay of forces the dutch public private sector partnership recently received a new impetus from the idea of block ing websites involving abusive content. the blocking of websites involving child abuse material was part of the desire to arrive at a more comprehensive approach towards combating the production and consumption of child abuse material see the filtering and blocking box below. the ministry of secu rity and justice the ministry of economic affairs and ecp epn assigned the andersson elffers felix consultancy firm the task of exploring the possibilities in order to arrive at a new public private sector partnership model for combating child pornography on the internet. the research outlines a frame of reference for blocking child abuse content which can also serve as a broader and more comprehensive form of collaboration. the frame of reference briefly describes the forces at play with regard to the combating of child pornography on the internet. the government private partners and social organi sations feature amongst these forces at play. the consultancy firm concluded that between the parties vs wil wereldwijde aanpak van cybercrime us wants global approach to tackle cybercrime tweakers may tweakers.net nieuws vs wil wereldwijde aanpak van cybercrime.html viewed may . toespraak eurocommissaris malmstr m binnenlandse zaken over cyber crime speech by the european commis sioner malmstr m home affairs about cyber crime european com mission february www. europa nu.nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissa ris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj viewed may . nationale cyber security strategie gepresenteerd national cyber security strategy presented www.rijksover heid.nl documenten en publica ties persberichten nationale cyber security strategie gepresenteerd.html viewed may . the use of technology to filter child abuse material by isps in addition to social responsibility will also be prompted by clients of isps and isps themselves which do not wish to suffer financial loss as a result of negative publicity. see www.bof.nl s kinderporno viewed may . ecp epn is a platform where the government the business world and civil society organisations ex change knowledge and work together to promote the development of the dutch information society. various projects investigations and debates unite parties and put the social meaning of ict on the agendas of the government the business world and civil society organisations. in this way the plat form achieves breakthroughs and creates the pre conditions as a result of which opportunities can be utilised and threats can be removed see www.ecp.nl viewed june . andersson elffers felix . http tweakers.net nieuws vs wil wereldwijde aanpak van cybercrime.html http www.europa nu.nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissa ad ris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj http www.europa nu.nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissa ad ris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj http www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publica ad ties persberichten nationale cyber security strategie gepresenteerd.html http www.rijksoverheid.nl documenten en publica ad ties persberichten nationale cyber security strategie gepresenteerd.html http www.bof.nl s kinderporno http www.ecp.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur that are part of the forces at play a natural tension exists between the normative and operational ap proach to tackling child pornography on the internet. this tension seems to be able to be explained by the fact that the public private partnership concerns aspects of internet governance. although there is consensus between the forces at play that sexual violence against children needs to be tackled there does not seem to be any agreement as to how this common objective should be achieved. it is clear that all relevant parties assume a role and need one another in order to arrive at an effective programme of measures. andersson elffers felix writes the public private sector partnership model is also aimed at combining the normative and operational interests with one another and thereby optimising the op portunities for collaboration. the partnership model proposed by the consultancy firm that would enable these parties to come to gether became the working group on blocking child pornography of the internet safety platform administered by ecp epn. in this working group only those parties that were able to play a possible role in the blocking of child abuse material came together such as the police internet service providers isps and the hotline combating child pornography on the internet. scientists politicians and digital civil rights movements that were not represented in the platform were very critical about the blocking of websites featuring child pornography. in the end it did appear that there was no longer any reason to block websites. the number of websites to be blocked had decreased by such an amount that there were no longer any sites or hardly any sites to be blocked. in fact the public private partnership can be hailed as a success in this case despite the natural tension the involved parties actively contributed resulting in the joint conclusion that there were insufficient grounds to enforce the blocking of websites featuring child abuse material. the operational approach is based on combating child pornography efficiently and effectively in accordance with the statutory standard that has been set. the police assume an operational role in the combating of child pornography on the internet as do private partners such as isps. the operational approach is under pressure from the normative approach to change and to meet the normative approach to a greater degree. this pressure has resulted in new developments such as a national project for the combating of child pornography launched by the police for example and an intensification of the public prosecution service s efforts in handling child pornography files. in this way the police and private partners carry out their work in a social context that they partly influence themselves. the tension between the normative and the operational approach therefore results from the fact that these two domains are not completely separated. the responsi bility for combating child pornography on the internet floats around between the different forces at play. the way in which the forces are distributed means that there will always be multiple parties that require one another in order to arrive at an effective programme of measures. the new partnership model therefore also aims to combine the normative and operational interest thereby optimising the opportunities for collaboration andersson elffers felix pp. . andersson elffers felix pp. . www.ecp epn.nl werkgroep blokkeren kinderporno viewed june . see for example callanan et al. europees akkoord beelden kindermisbruik niet blokkeren maar verwijderen european agreement do not block images of child abuse but remove them groenlinks june www.europa.groenlinks.nl europees akkoord a beelden k indermisbruik niet blokkeren maa r verwijderen viewed august alternatieve aanpak bestrijding afbeeldingen seksueel kindermisbruik alternative approach to combat images of the sexual abuse of children bits of freedom april www.bof.nl live wp content uploads briefinternetfilter def.pdf viewed august . voortgang blokkeren kinderporno progress in blocking child pornography parliamentary papers ii vi no. . http www.ecp epn.nl werkgroep blokkeren kinderporno http www.bof.nl live wp content uploads briefinternetfilter def.pdf implementation filtering and blocking following relatively lengthy discussions initiatives concerning filtering and blocking have died out. filtering is the process of determining which items within a flow of traffic must be blocked. blocking involves actually blocking a flow of traffic. filtering can take place either at the border centrally or prior to delivery by the isp de centrally . the national police services already experimented with this concept in . this experiment is described in a study carried out by the scientific research and documentation centre wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documentatiecentrum in and . the van der staaij rouvoet motion requested an investigation into the further possibilities of blocking and filtering on the internet. this motion resulted in the implementation of an investi gation. the researchers state that they found no factual basis for the assumption that filtering and blocking would prevent access to child abuse material in an effective manner. they also refer to the fact that filtering and blocking are not effective in preventing the exchange of material. newsgroups and peer to peer applications are the current exchange channels. at most blocking results in a small barrier for beginner searchers for child abuse material. it does not prevent access to such material. in on the basis of this investigation the minister of justice encouraged private parties to self regulate. the government needs to tackle the sexual abuse of children especially via the criminal route. all available capacity is required for this. the private parties were subsequently requested to take action to prevent the distribution of images. in response to this various isps promised to come up with a self regulating initiative. for this purpose they sought collaboration with the hot line combating child pornography on the internet. the system consists of a black list of websites that is compiled by this hotline and that is implemented by the isps. this did not turn out to be feasible. on november the internet safety platform comprising private partners and the ministry of economic affairs agriculture and innovation and the ministry of security and justice sent a letter to the minister for security and justice. the platform announced that the black list is so small that blocking of websites is an ineffective provision. the efforts involved are not in proportion to the desired effect. in the meantime the supply of child abuse images has moved to less ac cessible parts of the internet. the need to prevent individuals from being inadvertently confronted with such images the intention behind blocking had been removed. the minister of security and justice decided to follow the advice from the platform. in the meantime the police and the hosting provider leaseweb have made arrangements to launch a pilot in which the uploading of child abuse material can be prevented filtering . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . parliamentary papers ii and vi no. research carried out by the scientific re search and documentation centre filtering child pornography on the internet. an exploration of techniques and regulations in the netherlands and abroad. parliamentary papers ii and vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . parliamentary papers ii vi no. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur since the blocking of child abuse material in the netherlands was not implemented the internet safety platform no longer has an active working group that promotes public private partnerships in the field of child pornography. it follows from . . that this does not mean that the parties cited above the government intermediate level social organisations and the private sector are not currently develop ing any pps initiatives or are not able to do so. challenges faced by public private sector partnerships public private sector partnerships provide opportunities to tackle child pornography but also face chal lenges that prompt a clearer distribution of responsibilities tasks and competences. the relevance of recognising and acknowledging the interests of the involved parties in order to arrive at effective public private sector partnerships comes to the fore above. in the case of child pornography this involves vulnerable victims calculating offenders and material that constitutes a criminal offence. this means that public private sector partnerships are only possible after carefully assessing all relevant interests whereby the interest of the victim must be paramount. the appointment of community and security managers at various internet companies and collaborations with the police in the event of abuse il lustrate that this is actually taking place in practice. each time a new assessment must be made as to which tasks that strictly lie within the governmental domain would be suitable for a shared responsibility within public private sector partnerships or for transferring responsibility to private partners. police surveillance on habbo see box . . . and the internet safety platform are examples of instances where the government is actively investing in its own digital knowledge and resources. such investment also applies to the safeguarding of the fundamental rights of internet users. not only civil rights organisa tions and the academic world have referred to this point but this is also an explicit request of the gov ernment itself with regard to the combating of internet related offences. wherever the governmental tasks are left to self regulating capacity of the private sector the role of the government as the party that bears ultimate responsibility must exert a guiding influence. . . concrete actions of public private sector partnerships in this sub section various interventions undertaken by public private sector partnerships which in volve the prevention and or combating of digital child abuse material will be discussed. however as shown in the national cyber security strategy box below it emerges that public private sector partner ships also exist in other fields that are relevant to the issue of tackling child pornography. national cyber security strategy in february the impetus was given to form a national cyber security strategy ncss one of the main points of which was that child pornography must be tackled by public and private pel et al. knibbe . various researchers and interest groups believe that the opportunity for legal control must exist in the application of the statutory ntd regulation see www.bof.nl live wp content uploads brandbrief.pdf viewed june . see kamer eerst privacyonderzoek dan wetgeving court first privacy investigation then legislation webw ereld june webwereld.nl nieuws kamer eerst privacyonderzoek dan wetgeving.html viewed augustus www.tweedekamer.nl ao repo vj nationale veiligheid.pdf viewed june . see also european digital rights . http www.bof.nl live wp content uploads brandbrief.pdf http webwereld.nl nieuws kamer eerst privacyonderzoek dan wetgeving.html implementation parties in a more integrated manner . the ncss seems to focus predominantly on the com bating of new forms of crime that could not have come about without ict new tools for new crimes such as measures to tackle botnets and to a lesser extent on conventional forms of crime that were carried out with the help of ict old crimes new tools such as forms of terrorism . the government intends to bring together public and private parties in a national cyber security centre which is yet to be founded. it would be desirable if measures for tackling child pornog raphy and online sexual violence against children in more general terms were also included within the remit of the ncss similarly to the way in which the topic of child pornography al ready fits within the national infrastructure for tackling cybercrime nicc and of the european cybercrime centre which is yet to be founded. public private sector partnerships including ngos will also assume an explicit role in the latter european wide centre. the knowledge and experience of parties participating in the ncss may be very valuable for the purpose of tackling child pornography. these could include products and insights gained from the research projects recognition of digital information and fingerprinting herkenning digitale informatie en fingerprint ing hdief and terrorism on the internet terrorisme op internet which were carried out by the national coordinator for counterterrorism and security nationaal co rdinator terrorismebestrijding en veiligheid nctv . the majority of public private sector partnerships involve companies and ngos working together with government services. partnerships consisting of companies amongst themselves or partner ships between companies and ngos are less common. these usually involve information and aware ness raising projects which are described in . . the list is not complete but the actions described below show that much is already being done in the field of public private sector partnerships in rela tion to child pornography. there is however a lack of coherence with regard to a number of points. where possible public private sector partnerships need to be built on existing initiatives and if nec essary new initiatives could be developed for example with regard to measures for tackling post adolescent child pornography and the involvement of the internet community. the cross border character of many public private sector partnerships means that it is necessary to place considerable emphasis upon international co operation. for almost all forms of public private sector partnerships it is the case that the actions that result from this are most effective if they are co ordinated on an international level. nationale cyber security strategie slagkracht door samenwerking national cyber security strategy power through partnership appendix to parliamentary papers ii no. . see www.cpni.nl informatieknooppunt de nationale infrastructuur ter bestrijding van cybercrime nicc viewed june . toespraak eurocommissaris malmstr m binnenlandse zaken over cyber crime speech by the european commis sioner malmstr m home affairs about cyber crime european com mission february www. europa nu.nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissa ris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj viewed may . see www.nctb.nl onderwerpen terrorismebestrijding fingerprinting viewed august . see www.nctb.nl onderwerpen terrorismebestrijding terrorisme op het internet viewed august . http www.cpni.nl informatieknooppunt de nationale infrastructuur ter bestrijding van cybercrime nicc http www.europa nu.nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissa ad ris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj http www.europa nu.nl id vimphneganv nieuws toespraak eurocommissa ad ris malmstrom ctx vh alzift wj http www.nctb.nl onderwerpen terrorismebestrijding fingerprinting http www.nctb.nl onderwerpen terrorismebestrijding terrorisme op het internet child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur . . . private sector the interests of the private sector differ greatly from those of the authorities and intermediate level social organisations. companies are primarily concerned with their own financial interests. this aspect also arises in public private sector partnerships relating to child pornography legislative pro posals concerning data retention not only give rise to criticism from digital civil rights movements but storing large quantities of data gives rise to resistance from isps internet service providers for commercial reasons. at the same time offering safe private internet environments can be a unique selling point for companies and can in this way result in an approach in which money can actually be generated. social network sites and software developers millions of people in the netherlands have accounts with social network sites snss such as hyves facebook gosupermodels habbo and msn chat . various snss employ strategies in order to safe guard their internet environment from child pornography offenders . a large number of sites are working together with ngos and authorities in this process. an example of an integrated public private sector partnership applied to snss is described in the police on habbo box text. snss can also work together with other companies for example software developers and or the police in or der to clean up internet environments. in this way a partnership between facebook microsoft and the american national center for missing and exploited children ncmec has resulted in the use of photodna on this sns which is the largest in the world. using known images from ncmec s data base this system searches for child abuse material on facebook profiles. in the past networks of offenders have in fact been discovered on facebook. however the number of images involving child sexual abuse that have been discovered using photodna over the million profiles on facebook is unknown. hyves the dutch social network site provides advice to its members with regard to internet safety and works together with ngos in this regard. hyves also has an emergency button which users can use to warn community managers in the event that they discover offensive content. this indicates that these online communities are based on a reasonable self cleaning capacity and that online communities that do not have a self cleaning capacity such as the former boylover. taylor quayle p. . knibbe p. . see for example www.nl.gosupermodel.com support safety.jsp viewed may . photodna links in with the theory of technological enforcement and csr in the business sector. the technology was developed by microsoft and dartmouth college and given to the national centre for missing and exploited children. see www.microsoft.com en us news presskits photodna viewed may . international child porn ring on facebook cracked by police the huffington post august www.huffingtonpost.com facebook child porn n .html viewed august . previously the same technology brought up and matches on skydrive and bing respectively neither of which are snss blogs.technet.com b microsoft blog archive million friends against child exploitation.aspx viewed august . www.hyves.nl veilighyven viewed may . see stol pp. for responses to behaviour that transgresses moral standards in cyberspace. http www.microsoft.com en us news presskits photodna http blogs.technet.com b microsoft blog archive million friends against child exploitation.aspx http www.hyves.nl veilighyven implementation net require other interventions such as a criminal investigation or an intervention originating from welfare services see . . public private sector partnerships can also be found within the software industry. an example of this is the previously mentioned photodna. commercial filter programmes that make use of existing child pornography databases from the police and hotlines are also on the market. such products examples of situational prevention are aimed at places of work and hotels for example in order to combat child pornography in those environments. habbo habbo is an international online game chatting community owned by sulake a finnish company. habbo is a very large virtual community for young people in the netherlands attracting . million unique visitors each month. habbo is mainly aimed at children between the ages of and . in order to take part you need to create a habbo a virtual character with which you walk around a hotel. in order to provide a safe online environment for the habbos the company uses a com bination of social and physical safety. members under the age of need their parent s permis sion. moderators are present seven days a week. the moderators are able to issue a warning to members who violate the rules remove them from a room or if necessary remove them from the internet environment. an account or ip can be blocked in order to prevent unwanted individuals from gaining access. habbos also have the opportunity to alert a moderator. moderators can also follow users chat messages without the users being aware of this. if necessary habbo refers children who make a report to the correct institutions. habbo is then able to provide the involved institutions with chat logs and ip addresses. all conversations in the hotel run through a language filter before they appear on screen. this filters out sexual remarks and other unsuitable use of language and moderators are warned in the event of suspicious use of language. the intention behind this application is to safeguard the safety of the habbos. in addition to this habbo provides its users with information about the safe use of the internet in general and about the safe use of habbo in particular. the intention behind this provision of information is to increase social safety. habbo works together with other parties quite a lot by means of an infobus where partners from the cooperating organisations can find the answers to any questions that they may have. the hotline combating child pornography on the internet and the police are ex amples of parties that make use of this service. the police carry out surveillance of habbo hotel in this manner see box below . more than children identified and rescued in worldwide rescue operation europol march see www.europol.europa.eu content press more children identified and rescued worldwide po lice operation viewed august . see for example www.netclean.com eng viewed may . verbal information during the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings visit to habbo on april . moderators are paid supervisors. written information received from the community co ordinator of habbo on august . www.habbo.nl. http www.netclean.com eng http www.habbo.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur police surveillance of habbo digikids national expertise group in addition to its own moderators the multi player game habbo also makes use of the police in order to maintain a safe online environment. this involves police surveillance on the internet without criminal offences and or making use of investigative powers coming into play internet research . with the advent of internet surveillance a new task for the police has been created which calls for prudence. the behaviour of the police officers is constantly regulated and made visible. online surveillance is different to surveillance in the analogue world. it is not possible to stop and question someone on the internet for example. the objective for the police on habbo is to determine what the online role of the police should be and to gauge the effect of the police presence on habbo but also to gain an insight into the problems that are present amongst young people and to gain experience in the field of chatting. on the one hand the infobus provides in formation twice a month about various subjects such as loverboys and the safe use of the internet. on the other hand personal contact takes place by means of a notice board e mail and chat but also while the digital community police officer is on patrol in the online community. internet surveillance on habbo seems to be an important easily accessible way for young people to get in touch with the police. in this way sexual abuse cases in both digital and analogue worlds have come to light. this initiative forms part of the digikids national expertise group of the dutch police which publishes recommendations concerning the role of the dutch police with regard to the online safety of young people. the expertise group takes as its starting point the importance of three preconditions for the police action in cyberspace namely raising awareness amongst the police and communicating to young people being digitally aware the online accessibility of the police in order to carry out its main tasks being digitally accessible and the competency of the police to be able to implement these tasks in practice being digitally competent . in this way the group of experts is carrying out preparatory work to clearly show whenever the content of chat conversations between individuals children and parents or children amongst themselves would give companies reason to contact the police. the three conditions namely of being digitally aware digitally accessible and digitally competent appear relevant to all organisations involved with young people. the kindertelefoon service run by the youth care agency has also been present in the infobus since the summer of . similar organisations that provide assistance to vic tims would be able to enter into similar partnerships with private parties. infrastructure of the internet isps are already contributing to the efforts to combat child pornography for example by co operating in investigations carried out by investigative authorities and by removing child abuse materialfollowing notification of it see box prospect of removal . these obligations arise indirectly from the convention stol p. . habbo presentation internet surveillance young people june in ossendrecht. spreekuur op habbo habbo consultation right april . subsidy application for the purpose of action plan naar een digibekwame polit le jeugdtaak to wards a digitally competent police task for young people digikids expertise group august not public verbal information from the digikids national expertise group september . de kindertelefoon in de infobus the kindertelefoon in the infobus habbo july www.habbo.nl articles de kindertelefoon in de infobus in category safety viewed september . http www.habbo.nl articles de kindertelefoon in de infobus in category safety http www.habbo.nl articles de kindertelefoon in de infobus in category safety implementation on cybercrime of the council of europe and the electronic commerce directive of the eu . since isps now facilitate access to the internet for many consumers there is increasing pressure on the isps to take measures of their own accord to prevent the distribution of child abuse material. preventive measures that have been proposed include the recording of the identity of the operator of a website and the installation of filters when uploading content which are both to be carried out by hosting provid ers and measures such as data retention the recording of users blocking access to websites containing child abuse material and blocking the distribution of documents containing such material which are to be carried out by access providers. certain proposals are already being applied. for example isps are already limiting access to certain newsgroups within usenet. on the one hand isps are regarded as organisations that may be able to fulfil a key role in tackling child pornography whereas on the other hand the measures stated above may violate fundamental rights of users may not be effective and or may entail high costs. the character of the internet see . . makes clear that self regulating measures on behalf of isps are most effective whenever they are applied on an international level as op posed to on an individual or national level. this type of international partnership should also be able to contribute to the identification of mala fide isps . in addition to isps the internet corporation for assigned names and numbers icann also plays a role in managing the technical infrastructure of the internet. for this reason following remarks from an interpol employee that the identity details whois are not always accurate icann and interpol have announced a partnership to improve in ternet safety and combat cyber crime including among other offenses that of child pornography. the manner in which this partnership will be compiled is not yet known. in addition to this icann has recently introduced the.xxx extension for adult pornographic websites. it is expected that this exten see articles and of the cybercrime convention of the council of europe. the removal of child abuse material following notification is based on article of the eu electronic commerce directive. this is often the case in the event of a notice and take down policy see van eijk van engers p. . van eijk van engers p. write governments have played a clearly stimulating role in the develop ment of the current reporting system and also provide financial support. as a rule there is positive consensus for the existing system of internet service providers with relation to child abuse material. however in so far as cases of a more drastic nature are concerned such as filtering it follows from national law that a statutory basis is neces sary see the discussion in the netherlands regarding filtering . however the drastic nature of filtering as such can mean that it is desirable to place it within a more clearly defined legal framework for example for reasons of legal certainty. taylor quayle pp. . gercke pp. hecht p. . the newsgroups that when together form usenet are not actually part of the internet see jenkins pp. . taylor quayle pp. . gercke pp. . taylor quayle p. . solum pp. . child abuse cop slams icann the register march www.theregister.co.uk child abuse cop slams icann viewed august . interpol and icann advance cooperation on internet security after historic first meeting interpol may www.interpol.int public icpo pressreleases pr pr .asp viewed august . http www.interpol.int public icpo pressreleases pr pr .asp child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur sion which is used on a voluntary basis will contribute to a form of internet governance. as it is expected that the administrators of these sites need to comply with conditions that set out that measures should be actively taken to combat child abuse material the extension may be able to contribute to its reduction. financial and mobile phone service providers the challenges faced by those involved in tackling child pornography include the new methods of pay ment on the internet and the transition from the use of home pcs desktops to mobile pcs on gsms see . . . . the european financial coalition against commercial sexual exploitation of children online efc is a european public private sector partnership in which inter national investigative au thorities and companies from various sectors are putting a stop to child abuse materialthat is produced and distributed commercially. in addition to the dutch police force and the ministry of security justice financial service providers such as credit card companies and suppliers of pay systems and software developers as well as lawyers and ngos are involved in the efc. the efc is also seeking involvement with similar initiatives from investigative authorities such as circamp which is a european partner ship. one of efc s objectives is to analyse the nature and extent of material that is produced and distributed on a commercial basis and to devise interventions to decrease the demand and availability of such commercial child abuse material. the mobile alliance against child sexual abuse content macsac was founded in by members of the gsm association gsma in order to combat child pornography via mobile telephones and net works. the alliance intends to achieve this by preventing users from accessing websites featuring child abuse material applying a notice and take down regulation ntd to services of members of the alli ance and by promoting the use of hotlines. the potential is huge the members of the alliance have hundreds of millions of users. telephone service companies in operation in the netherlands are also members of macsac. the mobile alliance demonstrates that it is also possible for various collaborative associations to work together. the alliance cooperates with the american financial coalition against child pornography for example. gsma the co ordinating organisation is a partner of the british in ternet watch foundation iwf and works together with inhope the co ordinating organisation of hotlines. why icann s approval of the xxx domain is an important precedent milton mueller march blog.internetgovernance.org blog archives .html viewed august . see march draft rationale for approving registry agreement with icm s for.xxx stld icann march www.icann.org en minutes draft icm rationale mar en.pdf viewed august . see circamp.eu viewed august . european financial coalition . www.gsmworld.com our work public policy mobile alliance.htm viewed may . ntd regu lations describe how private individuals and companies in the online sector deal with complaints notice regarding illegal content such as child abuse images on the internet. the response to such a complaint usually involves the material being taken down by a party that is responsible for this take down . an example of a voluntary ntd regulation can be found on www.ecp epn.nl werkgroep notice and takedown viewed june . see www.gsmworld.com documents gsma inhope .pdf. http blog.internetgovernance.org blog archives .html http www.icann.org en minutes draft icm rationale mar en.pdf http circamp.eu http www.gsmworld.com our work public policy mobile alliance.htm http www.ecp epn.nl werkgroep notice and takedown www.gsmworld.com documents gsma inhope .pdf implementation the above european and international partnerships were capable of joining together relevant actors and express various strategies such as socially responsible undertakings and the removal of child abuse material data minimisation . no specific public private sector partnerships have been found for other technological developments such as cloud computing. affiliate marketing traffic brokering and search engines various actors and services exist within the online adult industry of which the sale of pornography is one example. by means of pornographic websites companies are able to earn money in a number of other ways and these business models also seem to apply to sites that operate in the grey area of child pornography such as modelling websites. there are also indications that revenue models and organisational structures of standard websites are similar to those of websites which clearly feature child abuse material. free websites also have revenue models. research reveals that both paid and unpaid websites consist of networks in which consumers are referred to other websites. service com panies that provide affiliate marketing specialised adult search engines and traffic brokering play an important role within these networks. the essence of this is that legal and illegal content providers need to make their location known because they would not sell anything otherwise and at the same time consumers are actively searching for material online. it is the above mentioned service provid ers who fulfil a key role in bringing together supply and demand. these service providers have probably included the stipulation in their conditions that they shall not link traffic to child pornography and or child erotica websites but research reveals that affiliated programs and traffic brokers do not usually monitor websites for content or do not verify the identity of the applicant. what is more child abuse thumbnails are sometimes placed on tgp cj sites an affiliated marketing technique in order to the grey area includes images in which it is unclear as to whether the material constitutes child por nography due to questions surrounding the age of the child that is depicted the sexual conduct that is depicted whether or not this constitutes child abuse material and or is sufficiently realistic see . . . . european financial coalition pp. . wondracek et al. . the term affiliate has taken on a special meaning within the realms of internet marketing. in this context an affiliate is a partner who for a certain fee ensures a flow of visitors to the website of the affiliate merchant the advertiser by means of links on his her website. thousands of affiliate programs exist that provide the correct means of achieving this. in the netherlands we also speak of partner programs. affiliate.uwstart.nl viewed august . leukfeldt et al. p. . taylor quayle pp. . for example clickcashmoney.com index.html viewed august . wondracek e.a. p. . tgp stands for thumbnail gallery post and tgp cj stands for thumbnail gallery post circle jerk . tgp and tgp cj are both websites featuring multiple thumbnails small images that can be clicked on by users of these websites. the user would then expect to arrive at a website where the thumbnail can be viewed in large sometimes for a fee or where a series of similar photos can be found. tgp cj sites do not refer the user to the corresponding image but to another tgp instead. the revenue model of these tgp cj sites is to generate a large amount of traffic visitors and to sell these to tgp sites and advertising revenue from banners see www.web.archive.org web www.cozyacademy. com classrooms tgp viewed august . http affiliate.uwstart.nl http clickcashmoney.com index.html http www.web.archive.org web www.cozyacademy.com classrooms tgp http www.web.archive.org web www.cozyacademy.com classrooms tgp child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur create a shocking effect and to encourage a higher percentage of clicks on the link and in this way to generate a profit . general search engines such as microsoft s bing and google are also able to fulfil a role in stopping searches by perpetrators of child pornography. the above named companies employ a zero tolerance policy with regard to child abuse material. however it emerges from google insights for search that the search engines are nevertheless indeed used by people who are searching for child abuse material considering the fact that entering search terms related to child pornography or child erotica still forms part of the interests of dutch users of google. in addition to this it appears that google s filter technology seems to utilise only the latin alphabet. the duty to ascertain and the online adult industry with reference to the task of tackling post adolescent child pornography cabinet members arib and gerkens submitted a motion to ensure that minors who look like they are of age are not used by the adult industry for the production of commercial adult pornography. one idea to combat this situation was the introduction of a duty to ascertain certainty an obligation to obtain certainty about a situation which must provide for regulations whereby operators of websites that offer adult pornography must be able to demonstrate that the models who are displayed have reached the age of eighteen. this idea was declined by the minister for security and justice on the basis of the argument that the existing instruments provided under criminal law are sufficient. www.asacp.org content webmaster viewed may . similar thumbnails and written advertising links that claim to link to child pornography websites do not usually do so. instead the links send visi tors to legal websites featuring child models and adult pornography see european financial coalition . www.docs.google.com support bin answer.py hl en answer viewed may . www.google.com insights search q preteen torrent c preteen bbs cpreteen model cpreteen cmpt q viewed may . the netherlands is in the world top for various search terms. in april an intern at bnrm searched for the term child pornography in the cyrillic script on www. google.nl for documents involving the issue of tackling child pornography in russia. consequently numerous hits referred to material constituting child abuse material. following reports by bnrm to the hotline combating child pornography on the internet the reporting centre also actually seemed to find child abuse material. adolescent and post adolescent child pornography is material that depicts minors who look like they are of age see lanning p. and . . . . parliamentary papers ii no. . the minister argued that the actual age of the involved person does not need to be proven in all cases for the penalisation of child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code is based on the apparent age of the depicted person. action may even be taken against images of persons of age who appear to be minors on the image. the public prosecution service has taken the position that a duty to ascertain is neither necessary nor desirable. the public prosecution service referred to various adverse effects the detection and prosecution of child pornography offences could even be made more dif ficult as a result. resulting in part from consultation with the public prosecution service it has been concluded that even without the statutory implementation of a duty to ascertain the objectives of the motion can still be complied with in a suitable manner see parliamentary papers ii no. and parliamentary papers ii vi no. . http www.asacp.org content webmaster http www.google.com insights search q preteen torrent c preteen bbs cpreteen model cpreteen cmpt q http www.google.nl http www.google.nl implementation the vice detective who developed the idea of the duty to ascertain won the police innovation prize for this idea. from a study trip that this detective made to the us where a similar version of the duty to ascertain exists it emerged that in practice the government appears to encounter great difficulties in enforcing this measure. a shift from commercially produced adult pornography to amateur pornography is currently underway whereby the amateur models cannot be traced. back in the netherlands the detective organised a meeting with certain representatives from the dutch adult industry. it emerged that a number of existing businesses already carry out checks on the age of models. it also emerged that the professional pornography industry in the netherlands just like the same industry in the us is faced with competition from amateurs and from professional producers from eastern european countries. if the enforcement of legislation in this case the duty to ascertain by the government only appears to be symbolic then the self regulation of the dutch adult industry by means of a trade organisation for example is possibly a step in the right direction towards combating adolescent and post adolescent child pornography. certain trade organisations of the adult industry exist in the us one of which is specifically directed not only towards combating adolescent and post adolescent child pornography but also towards removing all forms of child pornography from the online adult industry. this association of sites advocating child protection asacp maintains a hotline works together with the american national center for missing and exploited children and brings together efforts from the branch regarding this topic by sharing best practices and setting requirements for the asacp membership. in the meantime the asacp has also expanded its working activities to europe. . . . intermediate level social organisations in this section the term intermediate level social organisations refers to ngos and the online commu nity. intermediate level social organisations can also contribute to public private sector partnerships in the area of child pornography primarily in the fields of identification and information. in contrast with ngos the online community is not yet involved in public private sector partnerships although active involvement of the online community would be able to provide opportunities. ngos on both international and national levels various ngos are focused on the prevention and detection of child pornography. in this way ngos provide the online community children and parents with infor mation about the use of the internet. these ngos and the projects that they carry out are described in . . in addition to investigative authorities ngos run hotlines such as the hotline combating child pornography on the internet. reports of child abuse materialthat arise from this monitoring role are then passed on to the police see . . . it further emerges from these partnerships for example efc and macsac that ngos fulfil a role as expertise centres about the nature of child abuse material on the future of online adult entertainment surging demand the rise of free porn and the emergence of new business models researchandmarkets december www.researchandmarkets.com re ports the future of online adult entertainment surging viewed august . for example the free speech coalition see www.freespeechcoalition.com viewed may . www.asacp.org index.php content aboutus viewed may . asacp continues european expansion with london outreach ascap may www.asacp.org index.php content news item asacp continues european expansion with london outre ach viewed may . http www.freespeechcoalition.com http www.asacp.org index.php content aboutus http www.asacp.org index.php content news item asacp continues european expansion with london outre ach child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the open internet where companies probably go without specific knowledge in the area of the sexual abuse component of child pornography. prospect of removal the current working methods of the hotline combating child pornography on the internet are described in . . . . reports of child abuse material that are made by the online community are re ceived by the reporting centre and subsequently passed on to other institutions associate report ing centres of inhope or the national police services . in the event that the content is hosted in the netherlands and is not removed within a week the hotline sends a notification to the provider. that seems to work in practice. material is almost always removed following a notification being issued to the provider. a more pro active approach such as the one employed in the united king dom by immediately removing the material as soon as possible following notification would be able to relieve the burden upon the police whilst not affecting the police s objective to identify new victims. if the hotline combating child pornography on the internet and its colleagues in other countries were able to respond to reports immediately the most visible material material on upload services and commercial sites that is noticed by the online community which subsequently reports this to the reporting centre would be able to be disrupted in a way that is probably more effective than a lengthy criminal investigation with an uncertain outcome. this most visible market consists of sites that usually only recycle pre existing material or material that constitutes child pornography that is already known and or that display child pornography of the lightest category a part of which is hosted in the netherlands. this is in brief material that the police with their limited capacity do not regard as a priority. part of this material will then disappear another part will probably re locate to less accessible online environments on which police investigations may subsequently focus. in any case child pornography will be more difficult for viewers to find. research reveals that the opportunities to remove child abuse material even in cases where material from other countries is being hosted are sufficient. internet service provid ers isps remove such material relatively quickly. the european electronic commerce directive ec states that internet providers are liable for any unlawful material belonging to their the hotline combating child pornography on the internet always tries to determine the origins of an image. whenever distribution takes place from a different country and that country has a reporting centre this hotline forwards the information to a colleague reporting centre that is associated with inhope. if distribution takes place from the netherlands or from a different country and that country does not have a reporting centre the reporting centre forwards this information to the national police services see . . . and andersson elffers felix p. . european financial coalition p. . it then involves sites that display images within category and of the implementation provisions concerning child pornography as described in . . . . implementation provisions concerning child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code a dutch government gazette december no. . see figure . in . . . programme of improvements in tackling child pornography . european financial coalition p. . taylor quayle pp. . ak zensur . implementation customers if they are aware of its existence. where it concerns isps in countries that do not fall under the directive and or do not want to implement a voluntary ntd requests for mutual legal assistance are sufficient in most cases. isps that do not want to remove child abuse material consequentially do indicate that criminal investigations carried out by the police are neverthe less desirable. existing arrangements with the national police services need to be changed in order to achieve this pro active approach according to the british model. the european commis sion argues that the response time of the police should be reduced to a maximum of two days. internet community various reporting centres that are described in this report are based on citizen participation. the re porting of indications to the child abuse counselling and reporting centre stichting m. report crime anonymously meldpunt kinderporno op internet hotline combating child pornography on the internet and meldpunt cybercrime cyber crime reporting website are based on the principle that citizens can also play a part in combating child abuse material. showing the public a photo of an unknown victim on the television also touches on this point. this explicitly involves the participation of citizens in the detection process where the police or ministry of justice take the initiative as opposed to detection by the citizens themselves. various individuals report that they are searching for perpetrators of child pornography offenses for reasons not of a sexual nature and in so doing are taking part in civilian detection. civil ian detection has drawbacks in principle and in practice. detection is primarily a police matter which requires professional knowledge and expertise. in addition to this the privacy of potential suspects is under threat as civilians are not bound by the privacy guidelines that apply to government bodies. in addition accusations can take place that prove to be false accusations. . . direction of public private sector partnerships in the netherlands since the blocking of websites involving child pornography has not been enforced in the netherlands the internet safety platform no longer has an active working group that promotes public private sector partnerships and gives them direction. at the same time it is unclear as to how current interventions from public private sector partnerships link in with the focus formulated by the police the public pros ecution service and the ministry of security and justice and as to how these interventions fit in with the overarching focus of the effort to combat child pornography in the netherlands. stol et al. pp. . the liability referred to here is purely reactive article of the eu electronic commerce directive safeguards isps from the duty to pro active supervision. www.ecp epn.nl werkgroep notice and takedown viewed may . beperkte omvang internetfilter bewijs symboolpolitiek limited scope of internet filter proves symbolic policy bits of freedom june www.bof.nl beperkte omvang internetfilter bewijs sym boolpolitiek viewed june see also stol et al. pp. and bonnici pp. . sommer brown p. taylor quayle p. . written information from information society and media project officer directorate general econ tent safer internet from the european commission to the hotline combating child pornography on the internet april . cornelissens ferweda pp. . lanning p. . cornelissens ferweda p. . http www.ecp epn.nl werkgroep notice and takedown http www.bof.nl beperkte omvang internetfilter bewijs symboolpolitiek child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the ministry of security and justice the public prosecution service and the police have developed a clear focus with regard to the judicial approach to tackling child pornography. in summary this focus consists of a victim oriented approach which tackles hands on producers of child abuse material in addition to removing victims from their situation of victimisation. within the scope of this judicial focus public private sector partnerships are stated as an important prerequisite for tackling child abuse material on the internet but the direction that public private sector partnerships could take in order to contribute towards putting a stop to child pornography has not been further developed. in connection with the judicial focus on child pornography a possible focus on public private sector partnerships and associated strategies can be derived from the literature and the interventions described in . . . this focus on public private sector partnerships could be directed at the accessibility of child abuse material identifying offenders and victims and generating knowledge and resources to combat child pornography. related strategies for achieving this focus include making the private sector and ngos responsible for sweeping clean the internet environments allowing the internet community to participate in detection encouraging citizens to take responsibility for the use of technology and encouraging companies to operate in a socially responsible fashion whenever they offer digital services and products. a clear focus with associated strategies can also provide direction to the further devel opment of a barrier model for child pornography. barrier model for child pornography in the minister for justice established a task force to tackle child pornography and child sex tourism in order to combat child sex tourism and the production distribution and down loading of material constituting child pornography. one of the task force s main tasks is to support the programme based approach by means of a barrier model. a barrier model is an instrument used to promote an integrated and multi disciplinary partnership for the tackling of child pornography by exploring amongst other things whether other parties that are not cur rently involved would be able to play a role. the integrated identification of possible interven tions for the combating of child pornography is key. after the barrier model had been initially set in motion by the ministry of the interior and kingdom relations at the time the responsibility for the further development of this model was taken over by the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography programma verbeteren aanpak kinderporno . the programme of im provements in tackling child pornography expects the barrier model to make a contribution in tackling the problem head on by promoting collaborative actions implemented together with partner organisations and thereby preventing possible child pornography. in addition to this it is assumed that the model will influence the working process and methods of completion of the process. the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography additionally stated in the response of the korpsmonitor to the question as to when the national plan for tackling child pornography could be regarded as successful was when such a public private partnership exists that would enable us to develop a preventive programme and tackle the problem head on programma verbeteren aanpak kinderporno programme of improvements in tackling child pornography p. . decision of the minister of justice of november no. concerning the creation of the task force aanpak kinderporno en kindersekstoerisme. dutch government gazette no. november . implementation a written communication that a complete palette of strategies to combat child pornography will significantly increase the overall effectiveness. the experiences gained from the amster dam sexual abuse case as well as the development of intervention strategies provide a valuable contribution to the further improvement of the process of tackling child pornography and of the associated barrier model. focus the number of child pornography cases that involve possession with no concrete evidence of abuse is so great that the police cannot act on all of them. the current shift of focus of the police the public prosecution service and the ministry of security and justice involves these parties using a victim oriented approach to place a focus on perpetrators of child pornography offenses with a high risk of hands on abuse as well as upon identifying victims. however the problem of the sheer number of hands off viewers will continue to exist for as long as the material remains so easy to obtain and distribute via the internet see . . . . besides this the government cannot keep an eye on all movements on the inter net and for this reason other parties have been assigned to detect instances of abuse. finally research reveals that there is sometimes a lack of digital knowledge and experience within the government. the focus of public private sector partnerships needs to be complementary to the focus of the police the public prosecution service and the ministry of security and justice in addition to providing an answer to the problem outlined above. public private sector partnerships could therefore focus more emphatically on the accessibility of old material in open internet environments. the literature considers reducing the accessibility as a type of situational prevention which may be able to reduce the number of perpetrators of child pornography offenses. it could be discussed whether the government would be able to assume a facilitating role in this as the example of photodna demonstrates by providing the private sector and ngos with the hash codes of known material for example with the intention of removing this known mate rial. in so far as offenders victims and new material are concerned usually from less easily accessible internet environments see . . . the ngos companies and the internet community could fulfil a supporting role for the purpose of criminal detection by actively identifying registering and reporting the existence of such material. various social networking sites snss in the netherlands have already formulated safety policies and appointed individuals community managers to implement this policy whereby abuse is reported to the police. finally private parties ngos the scientific domain and the internet community can contribute to the improvement of knowledge and the provision of technological resources to organisations with or without a public responsibility such as the police programme of improvements in tackling child pornography p. . these usually relate to cases that only involve low value evidence such as ip addresses see liberatore et al and . . see . . alternative means of settlement whether or not pertaining to criminal law probably ensue for other perpetrators of child pornography see . . . taylor quayle . in addition to this victims of child pornography suffer harm as a result of the permanent existence of the images see . and von weiler et al. . stol . taylor quayle pp. . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur probation and after care services and services that provide assistance but also interventions by ngos and the business sector themselves. strategies a possible strategy that is mainly applicable to reducing the accessibility of old material constituting child pornography is sweeping internet environments clean of child abuse material and related content for example search terms related to child pornography as much as possible by removing or adding data. this strategy is based on the situational factors that are related to searching the pre criminal situation and the tactics of individuals who view child abuse material and child pornography as data for the internet see . . . various interventions that are described in . . are focused on removing child abuse material as much as possible once it has been identified such as online communities and isps applying the voluntary and statutory ntd regulations. in the discussion about whether or not to block child abuse material the motto don t block but remove is often used. removal is based on data minimisation material needs to be removed from the internet. data related to child pornography such as search terms related to child pornography on search engines and links to material constituting child pornography should also be removed where possible by companies ngos and the internet community. data maximisa tion is the opposite of data minimisation. internet environments where material cannot be removed are sometimes suitable to add data to. the motto here is if you have a needle create a haystack private parties and ngos are able to participate in certain internet environments in the same way as consumers of child abuse material. they are able to add data by supplying large numbers of files and or reference with titles related to child pornography which in actual fact simply contain a warning or refer to self help programmes such as croga.org or stop it now . in addition to this not only the quantity but also the nature of the data is important in data maximisation. ngos and organisations that provide as sistance could draw attention to self help programmes in open internet environments where offenders this does not necessarily involve obligations of isps to participate in a criminal investigation or com mercial product development by the private sector demanded by the police see nfi en ncim groep sluiten partnership nfi and ncim group form a partnership dutch forensic institute august see www.nederlandsforensischinstituut.nl nieuws nfi en ncim groep sluiten partnership. aspx cp cs viewed august . such interventions are not included in the previously stated definition of public private sector partnerships. taylor quayle pp. . van der hulst neve pp. . europees akkoord beelden kindermisbruik niet blokkeren maar verwijderen european agreement do not block but remove images of child abuse groenlinks june www.europa.groenlinks.nl europees a kkoord a beelden kindermisbruik niet blokkeren maar verwijderen viewed august . data maximisation is also used within the scope of detection of material constituting child pornogra phy on peer to peer networks. liberatore et al. developed a method that places unique identify ing tags in the storage space of a downloader of child abuse material on peer to peer networks. this technology is now being used by institutions involved in detection in states in the usa. presentation informatie privacy en veiligheid information privacy and safety by b.j. koops university of tilburg january in the hague. http croga.org http www.nederlandsforensischinstituut.nl nieuws nfi en ncim groep sluiten partnership.aspx cp cs implementation in the early stages of child pornography come together because they are still in a preliminary stage of delinquent behaviour and would probably be receptive to therapy see . . however examples of data maximisation in the field of child pornography are yet to be found. these ngos and organisa tions or the police could also devise strategies in order to be able to monitor similar internet environ ments such as newsgroups and to interfere with them if necessary. one of the focal points proposed above is that parties other than the police are able to fulfil an iden tifying role for the purpose of criminal detection which involves these parties being able to provide the government with digital knowledge and resources. a strategy that links in with the focal point stated above is to actively inform relevant actors about child pornography and to involve them in the tackling of child pornography. the internet community is already identifying material offenders and victims. use is already being made of citizen participation in tackling child pornography but other initiatives that actively involve public private sector partnerships in the internet community are yet to be found. crowd sourcing is an example of citizen participation based on the assumption that a group of people as a whole always know more than a few experts. the development of a child pornography barrier model is an example that would lend itself to crowd sourcing. websites such as tweakers.net webwereld.nl and security.nl see hundreds of thousands of visitors from the netherlands each day who have a professional interest in topics related to ict. it is likely that innovative ideas will originate from professions such as software developers internet entrepreneurs online marketers traffic brokers and security officers. problems that arise in criminal investigations involving child pornography could be presented to the internet community in an abstracted manner in the same way in which cold cases and ongoing cases are put online. a subsequent potential strategy is to increase the personal responsibility of companies and the internet community similar to the way in which the previously mentioned association of sites advocating child protection is attempting to do so. the private sector is introducing new technologies to the public. how see also . . . . the online subculture is an important component for people with a preferential or exclusive predilection for children. these people come together to discuss their sexual preferences on various open dutch language forums see . . . taylor quayle p. . possibly that experiences gained from the entertainment industry with regard to preventing content from similar internet environments may be able to contribute see www.newswise.com articles view last viewed may . see inhoud pagina kinderporno op anonieme diep verborgen websites content page child abuse material on anonymous well hidden websites public prosecution service august www.om.nl actueel nieuws persberichten kinderporno anonieme viewed september . in fact the hotline combating child pornography on the internet is receiving reports that way see . . cornelissens ferweda p. . the involvement of these ict professionals in the combating of child pornography emerges amongst others from responses that can be found on various websites for ict experts see for example www. tweakers.net nieuws hoofdverdachte in kinderpornozaak zou encryptie expert zijn.html www.politieonderzoeken.nl www.politie rotterdam rijnmond.nl gezocht cold cases.aspx and www. nationale recherche.nl viewed may . http tweakers.net http webwereld.nl http security.nl http www.newswise.com articles view http www.newswise.com articles view http www.om.nl actueel nieuws persberichten kinderporno anonieme http www.tweakers.net nieuws hoofdverdachte in kinderpornozaak zou encryptie expert zijn.html http www.politieonderzoeken.nl http www.politie rotterdam rijnmond.nl gezocht cold cases.aspx http www.nationale recherche.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur ever this also brings with it a responsibility for the services and products to be safe. socially responsible undertakings on the internet are listed as providing a significant contribution to the prevention and combating of child pornography on the internet. the first initiatives to bring this about have already been set in motion. it is now important to roll out these codes of conduct such as the principles of safe internet use and de juiste klik the right click and to encourage companies to implement these codes of conduct. in addition to this the internet community could bear responsibility itself for protecting users from child abuse material. the fact that businesses individuals ngos and governments develop products and offer these free of charge does not only emerge from the examples in . . but also from the dutch browser designed for children mybee.nl and the search engine designed for children meester sipke.nl . these resources ensure that children up to the age of eleven only have access to safe websites for children and that they are in this way less able to quickly come into contact with unwanted persons grooming and content child abuse material . this all fits in with the theory of technological enforce ment large numbers of citizens have connected with technology the government should therefore make use of the fact that citizens like to use technology and provide them with information technology with which they can help to prevent and combat child pornography. as emerges above concrete actions can in practice overlap with various strategies standard privacy settings for children on snss are based on data minimisation for example and therefore form an example of socially responsible undertakings. . . conclusion direction of and interplay of forces in public private sector partnerships as described in the sub sections above there are various public private sector partnerships existing in the netherlands and in other countries that are in the process of undertaking a variety of initiatives in order to combat child pornography. a possible focus and associated strategies can be derived from these interventions. it is therefore advisable to secure public private sector partnerships once again within a platform where the various forces at play can come together and can jointly give direction to this partnership. since the blocking of child abuse material in the netherlands was not implemented the internet safety platform of ecp epn no longer has an active working group that promotes public private sector partner ships in the field of child pornography. however research carried out by andersson elffers felix refers to hecht taylor quayle p. henriques . principles for the safer use of connected devices and on line services by children draft april digital agenda assembly june brussels. www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl files the right click enacso final dutch .doc viewed may . the theory of technological enforcement is based on the principle that technology primarily regulates the behaviour of the people who actually use it. according to stol this was also the case when the dutch police centrally blocked child abuse material in . the project was very time consuming for the detectors who would rather have spent this time detecting perpetrators of child pornography of fenses. in addition to this there was no serious indication to assume that this technological measure had a regulatory effect on the behaviour of those individuals using the internet to search for child abuse material. stol pp. . see www.childnet.com downloads yigf statement of beliefs.pdf viewed may . http mybee.nl http meestersipke.nl http meestersipke.nl http www.meldpunt kinderporno.nl files the right click enacso final dutch .doc http www.childnet.com downloads yigf statement of beliefs.pdf implementation the importance of the existence of consultative bodies in which relevant parties come together. a similar consultative body could boost and give direction to public private sector partnerships and at the same time develop new initiatives and reinforce existing initiatives. one central point could also be a point of contact and assembly for public private sector partnerships and best practices from other countries. the internet safety platform of ecp epn which hosts the blocking child pornography and notice and take down working groups is an obvious choice to give direction to public private sector partnerships. in order to prevent initiatives from interfering with the focus of the police or overlapping with the barrier model that is currently being developed co ordination with the programme of improvements in tack ling child pornography is desirable. it may well be that alongside the current internet safety platform and the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography the national cyber security centre provides opportunities to encourage public private sector partnerships with regard to child pornogra phy. in considering how to tackle child pornography it should be noted that it is necessary to involve the internet community on a more structural basis. see www.ecp epn.nl platform internetveiligheid viewed august . http www.ecp epn.nl platform internetveiligheid conclusions and recommendations . core message the introduction concludes with the core message of the report. this is repeated here children are entitled to protection from all forms of sexual violence. the approach towards tackling child pornog raphy must form part of an integrated approach towards tackling sexual violence against children. connections coordination and monitoring form essential elements of that approach. the dutch government has the task and the express intention to do its part in protecting children from sexual violence. this task arises from among other legislation the aforementioned lanzarote convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. protection from child pornography also falls within the scope of this protection. the extent of the issue means however that such protection cannot solely be provided by a repressive approach in which only the police public prosecution service and the minister for security and justice bear responsibility. prevention of offenses identification and registration of offenders and ex perpetrators after care for offenders provision of assistance to victims and collaborations with private parties also form essential elements of the pro cess. the task of coordinating the implementation of the lanzarote convention has been assigned to the ministry of security and justice and the ministry of health welfare and sport. it is clear that these ministries have also developed the greatest number of initiatives in order to protect children from sexual violence. as a phenomenon child pornography cannot be regarded separately from sexual violence it would therefore be illogical to artificially separate the two in terms of policy. the findings in the previous chapters show that such a separation does in fact exist. this is regrettable and results in situations where interventions are rendered less effective. the programmes carried out by the coordinating ministries need to be combined and these ministries should jointly realise measures to combat sexual violence against children including child pornography. partnerships with other governmental bodies institu tions and professionals involved should also be sought. knowledge of the complex phenomenon as provided in the first chapter is relevant when implementing the strategy and collaboration. on the basis of the above it would seem logical to arrive at an integrated policy for the protection of children from sexual violence. strictly speaking this falls outside the scope of the reporting task with regard to child pornography. a consideration of measures to combat child pornography outside the framework of the measures for tackling sexual violence would do no justice to the reporting task. the ob vious importance of connections between the implementation processes and the many actors involved constitute sufficient reason to recommend the government to implement an integrated programme of measures coordinated by the responsible ministries. independent monitoring would also form part of that process. in order to ensure continuity all of this should be enshrined in law. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the foundations for the core message have been set out in the previous chapters. hereafter the findings with regard to policy and implementation will first of all be outlined as described in chapters and . problem areas and points for improvement will be listed and the possibilities to form connections between actors and processes will be explained. finally the core message will be set out in specific terms. . where do matters stand at present . . child pornography as a complex phenomenon the phenomenon of child pornography encompasses perpetrators victims and technology consisting of abusive material involving children on the one hand and technology primarily ict which makes it possible to produce distribute and possess such material on the other hand . each of these elements varies considerably and the nature of perpetrators victims or material is not clear cut. the commercial circuit differs from the amateur circuit as far as perpetrators victims and material are concerned and the behaviours may vary as well. the issues that confront adolescent or post adolescent victims are different to those involving pre adolescent victims and the perpetrators as well do not form a homogenous group. some individuals only view child abuse material whilst other users of such material also physi cally abuse children themselves. this variation has implications for the way in which child pornography is tackled. if policy and implementation are to be successful they must reflect the diversity that exists in that area. at present child pornography actually takes the form of digital child abuse images. technological de velopments are rapidly superseding one another and will almost always influence the phenomenon of child pornography. what is more online aspects increasingly feature in other forms of sexual violence against children. perpetrators and potential perpetrators as well as victims use ict intensively. under age victims can also be found in cyberspace. the offline and online worlds often converge into one as far as they are concerned and this means that both worlds must be taken into account in legislation policy and implementation. technological empirical and legal expertise and the associated means must be sufficient to keep pace with the recent developments in the digital domain. ict sometimes presents a challenge yet it can also provide a means of preventing and combating child pornography. the issue of child pornography is not bound by time or space. individuals have been producing and viewing child abuse material since visual technology photography came into existence and with the techniques that exist today it is likely that child abuse material even very old material will still be available for a very long time to come. space is hardly a factor at all in the past individuals who sexu ally abuse children have always been able to find their victims and other perpetrators. however ict has added a new dimension to the phenomenon namely cyberspace which enables perpetrators victims and material to come directly into contact with one another anywhere and at any time. it is important that continuity is achieved in tackling child pornography and in this regard it is highly likely that a simi lar issue exists in other countries in relation to the strategy used to tackle the problem. as far as efforts to prevent and tackle child pornography in the netherlands are concerned it will sometimes be desirable to seek international cooperation but this also means that we can examine whether experiences in other countries can be of benefit to the strategy used to tackle the issue in the netherlands. conclusions and recommendations the extent of the phenomenon of child pornography perpetrators victims and material is unknown. as far as the number of perpetrators and the quantity of child abuse material are concerned it may be argued that the extent of the problem is increasing. this means that we must seek a strategy to tackle child pornography both within and beyond the criminal justice process. it is not known what propor tion of minor victims of sexual abuse are also victims of child pornography nor can any judgments be made with regard to the numbers of minors who are victims of phenomena such as sexting and contact made online for a sexual purpose grooming . it is therefore necessary to investigate these areas in the netherlands in order to develop and implement evidence based policy. child pornography is closely associated with other forms of sexual abuse or sexual violence against chil dren that is perpetrated in both the analogue and digital worlds. the legal framework has been useful in defining the area of investigation article b of the dutch criminal code defines child pornography itself but it is not the only perspective that can be used to address the subject. the actual problem involves protecting children from sexual violence. in order to achieve this however an effective under standing of the phenomenon is indispensible. . . the government agenda for the purpose of this report the policy responses of the government to the development of the phe nomenon of child pornography have been investigated. attention has been devoted to policies that are explicitly directed towards child pornography but also to programmes that are directed towards child abuse in more general terms including sexual violence against children as well as the various programmes in the field of domestic violence. sexual violence against children also forms a part of this issue. the extent to which the programmes mentioned are or could be of indirect importance in tackling child pornography has also been considered. from this point of reference it appears that the policy only partially reflects the development complexity and context of the phenomenon of child pornography. current policy has been examined but the way in which the governmental policy has developed over the past decades and the extent to which lessons can be learnt from prior policies have also been ana lysed. what is striking is that with regard to child pornography a major focus has been placed upon an incident driven policy. the only integrated programme to address the sexual abuse of children in which child abuse material formed a component was the national action plan for combating sexual abuse of children naps . the naps ended in december . after the framework for cooperation that was created through the naps was no longer maintained in the sense that child pornography was no longer integrated into a programme aimed at combating sexual violence against children. continuity with regard to this component was therefore absent. the intention of the naps was to integrate the measures for tackling child pornography but as a result of the naps ceasing to exist it seems as if the digital and analogue strands of the policy have come apart. within the policy child pornography tends to be branded as cybercrime and is therefore merely to be dealt with by the judicial authorities. the minister for youth and families emphasised this in response to parliamentary questions from member of parlia ment verdonk with the remark that this topic primarily falls within the remit of the ministry of justice. parliamentary papers ii no. . the name of the ministry of justice was changed into ministry of security and justice in october . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur in the period following this the ministry of security and justice assumed responsibility for and took the initiative in the task of combating child pornography. as seen in various programmes this seems to be directed towards the implementation of measures or the improvement of existing measures to tackle child pornography such as the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography the korpsmonitor and the policy implemented by the police with regard to the approach towards tackling child pornography in general. the starting point for this is the enforcement of article b of the dutch criminal code. this approach initiated by the ministry of security and justice is primarily a digital approach and is primarily based on repressive measures. nevertheless this ministry also employs an analogue and partly preventive approach towards combating sexual violence against children as a component of the domestic violence programme. other ministries are also taking initiatives to develop policies aimed at combating and preventing child abuse combating sexual violence in dependency relationships promoting the ability to defend oneself against sexual approaches and promoting sexual health creating safe day care centres and increasing children s knowledge about digital safety. amongst other things this involves immediately combating or preventing sexual violence against children. work is almost always carried out on an inter departmental basis. initiatives sometimes start out in the form of programmes implemented by a single ministry and other departments join in at a later stage whereas other programmes are implemented government wide. an example of the latter is the initiative of the ministry of justice with regard to domestic violence that later went on to form part of the governmental policy. in addition to the ministry of security and justice the ministry of health welfare and sport as coordinating ministry in this field also instigates a great many initiatives. the sexual health programme the regional plan to tackle child abuse and educational programmes at schools and day care centres can also be listed as examples of programmes aimed at the prevention of sexual violence. the ministry of security and justice and the ministry of health welfare and sport as well as the ministry of education culture and science the ministry of social affairs and employment and the ministry of economic affairs agriculture and innovation are involved in these programmes. these broad integrated programmes do not generally devote much attention to the digital aspects of sexual violence against children that have developed in recent years nor is a great deal being done to investigate the opportunities that the digital world presents for preventing and combating child pornography. no effective connection between the judicial explicit approach towards tackling child pornography and the more wide ranging initiatives with regard to the prevention and further tackling of sexual violence has been formed. in this respect a comprehensive policy framework in which analogue and digital developments in the context of sexual violence against children are connected does not yet exist. this means that this aspect of the policy is fragmented. as a result the complexity of the phenomenon of child pornography is also insufficiently represented in policy. policy initiatives with regard to child pornography seem to be incident driven and there appear to be gaps in the continuity of the policy. this point is illustrated by the way in which the previously stated naps disappeared without a sound. nevertheless the existing governmental initiatives show great promise. the process of linking together the various programmes is the area in which progress can be made. initiatives have also already been developed in the practical implementation programmes that seek to form such connections and these have been described as best practices in the previous chapters. conclusions and recommendations . . implementation . . . general on a practical level the complexity of the phenomenon of child pornography and the variety of forms that it is able to take present considerable challenges for the implementation of measures for the pre vention and combating of child pornography. this report set out to examine the status of the issue in terms of the constituent processes that can be distinguished from one another in this connection. these processes include prevention registration and identification detection prosecution and trial after care and supervision of offenders and the provision of assistance to victims. the ways in which these processes are implemented have been investigated and analysed encompassing various programmes that are underway and are directed towards perpetrators and victims of domestic violence child abuse sexual health and sexual violence. from this analysis it has emerged that in practice little attention is devoted to aspects related specifically to child pornography such as digital forms of sexual violence against children and the inter relatedness of the online and offline worlds of offenders and victims. the situation with regard to the repressive implementation processes such as detection prosecution and trial and probation and after care in which article b of the dutch criminal code is of course the guiding principle for the actors is a different one. however even in these processes the connection between online and offline sexual violence can sometimes be incomplete. as child pornography takes place within the wider context of sexual violence against children and due to the fact that the practical implementation of the relevant approach is in many cases not specifically directed towards child pornography a considerable part of this process involves the implementation of programmes against sexual violence with no specific context that relates to child pornography. for interventions in the digital domain the government is in part dependent on collaborations with private parties. bearing this is mind the extent to which public private sector partnerships have been taking shape has been investigated. finally the investigation also focused on the extent to which connections have been formed between and within the processes where this is necessary and on the issue of whether or not links exist between policy and implementation with which policy can be translated into practice and vice versa. many of the problem areas found in the processes of implementation seem to be related to the complexity of the phenomenon and the fragmentation in terms of policy. . . . prevention the prevention of child pornography is evidently closely related to the prevention of sexual abuse of children. after all material constituting child pornography cannot usually be produced without the sexual abuse of children having taken place. potential perpetrators and victims therefore would appear to form the most obvious target groups of measures designed to prevent the sexual abuse of children. however as the sexual abuse of children takes place within and is influenced by specific situational and social contexts amongst other things the literature takes a broader approach as a basis for the preven tion of sexual abuse of children. this approach gives rise to four target groups for the implementation of preventative measures perpetrators victims situations and communities. primary prevention aims to prevent individuals from becoming perpetrators or victims by means of general provision of infor mation and the raising of awareness among these target groups as a whole. this type of preventive measure is geared towards each of the four target groups as a whole. by contrast secondary prevention is child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur specifically concerned with those individuals groups and locations that pose a risk within the four target groups. in comparison with primary prevention secondary prevention has the advantage in theory that the measures are aimed at the individuals and situations who that require them. finally tertiary prevention is concerned with intervention measures for individuals groups and situations after sexual abuse has already taken place. this type of measure aims to prevent abuse from continuing or being repeated. tertiary prevention measures relate to early identification and the limitation of the harm done to victims for example. these aspects will be discussed later. prevention measures within the perpetrators target group currently focus upon those who already have convictions and far less upon prevention with respect to individuals who are at higher risk of com mitting a sexual offence against children for the first time but have not yet done so. a very promising measure that also targets individuals who have not yet committed offences of production distribution or possession of child abuse material or sexual abuse of children will be the introduction of the british initiated helpline stop it now in the netherlands in . with respect to the prevention of sexual abuse of children a great deal of emphasis is placed upon the potential victims. this is not entirely without contention however especially in relation to young children. adults should bear responsibility for children s safety. little is known of the actual preventive effect of prevention programmes targeted at children and many programmes devote no attention to new media and the risks that these pose to young people. all prevention projects concerned with sexual abuse must therefore expressly address the dangers associated with online behaviour including those that relate to child pornography. as far as many perpetrators are concerned an important reason for abusing children is that they have the opportunity to do so. the purpose of situational prevention is to remove this opportunity or to reduce the number of opportunities. the gunning committee has proposed a number of measures with regard to situational prevention which include measures to implement the four eyes principle and a registra tion system for staff at day nurseries. although the gunning committee concerns itself exclusively with day nurseries it could or should also be possible to apply such measures in other sectors in which people work with children. a fourth target group that can form the focus of prevention measures is the general public. although the general public are well aware of the phenomena of child sexual abuse and child pornography many misconceptions exist in relation to perpetrators and victims of such offences. moreover detailed reporting of major abuse cases can give rise to anxiety amongst the public whilst they are not given the means to protect themselves and their children from abuse. to this end it could be useful to take an approach such as that of a public health model in which the sexual abuse of children is viewed within the broader context of public health. such a model can focus upon education and the identification of risks and it can also target perpetrators. the absence of accurate information and the attitude of the public towards paedophilia can make the existing barriers for paedophiles to seek help even greater. in order to break through this barrier and to actually achieve a preventive effect it is important that the public is informed of the nature of victims and perpetrators. as yet no such approach is used in the netherlands. the two greatest challenges we face in the prevention of child pornography and the closely associated wider phenomenon of sexual abuse of children involve the translation of knowledge and expertise into conclusions and recommendations evidence based prevention policy on the one hand and prevention at each of the three prevention lev els on the other hand. it should therefore be recommended that an all encompassing evidence based prevention strategy is developed that consists of a combination of primary secondary and tertiary pre vention measures. . . . identification and registration the identification of child abuse material forms an important part of tertiary prevention of child por nography. the material can be identified in relation to perpetrators victims or content. perpetrators themselves and individuals in their immediate environment are able to provide or notice indications of abuse having been committed. to date there have still been no specific concrete measures taken with respect to the recognition of potential offenders and the immediate actions to take following such recognition. the stop it now project that is to be set up in the netherlands plays an important role in addressing the lack of activities in that regard. however the hotline combating child pornography on the internet which is involved in launching this project in conjunction with the de waag outpatient forensic centre must keep this new role the identification of perpetrators strictly separate from its other duties the identification of content and via helpwanted.nl identification of victims . individuals in close proximity to perpetrators can also report indicators that they have noticed to stichting m report crime anonymously . there is still potential for the police to increase the amount of feedback that they provide to report crime anonymously. victims individuals that form part of their family or friends and professionals who directly come into contact with victims can report or notice indications of children having been abused. significant steps have already been taken with regard to identifying situations involving individuals who have become victims of sexual abuse against children and the actions that should be taken by those in close proximity to the victims both in a personal and professional context. it is important that the public campaigns that have been developed are continued and that these campaigns also pay attention to indicators in digital media. in addition it is expected that the forthcoming compulsory reporting code for domestic violence and child abuse can ensure that professionals no longer lack the means to undertake activi ties. the use of a reporting code will probably result in more frequent interventions in the event of any suspicions. individuals in close proximity to victims both in the personal and professional sphere have many bodies which they can contact and the most obvious ones would be the amks child abuse counselling and reporting centres . bnrm conducted an exploratory study that showed that the ad ditional dimension of victimisation as a result of child abuse material is generally not recognised or acknowledged. it is not standard practice for amk staff members to ask questions in relation to child abuse material in cases of sexual abuse. no specific care provision is available in relation to this aspect either. staff of amks do not have sufficient knowledge of child pornography and more broadly speaking of the digital indicators of abuse due to shortcomings in training. it is important that more attention is paid to this aspect. victims themselves are able to contact organisations such as kindertelefoon. un fortunately kindertelefoon does not record details of child pornography in cases of sexual abuse against children. a positive development however is that the organisation now actively refers children to youth care agencies. in addition it is now possible for victims to send a report specifically in cases of online abuse to helpwanted.nl. victims will also soon be able to use an online reporting button which is currently being developed within the scope of the digivaardig digibewust digitally skilled and digitally aware programme. it is important in this regard that the behind the scenes aspects of the reporting button initiative are well organised. http helpwanted.nl http helpwanted.nl child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur internet users may unwillingly encounter child abuse material on the internet and they can report this content that they have identified to the privately run hotline combating child pornography on the internet and or the cyber crime reporting website run by the police. it is important that material that has been reported is removed by isps as soon as possible. in order to ensure that this happens the agreements between the hotline combating child pornography on the internet and the police must be revised. the british counterpart hotline the internet watch foundation may serve as an example in this regard. it may be possible to consider expanding the remit of the hotline combating child pornography on the internet for example to extend to monitoring and or shutting down forums and networks pos sibly within the scope of the stop it now project. . . . detection child abuse material in the hands of the police forms the evidence that sexual abuse has taken place. the focus in the criminal investigation must still be upon victim identification however. that is also the case in theory but practice has shown that this approach is successful in only a few cases. the police have lit tle information a priori in relation to a potential perpetrator and it is often nothing more than an internet identity. the information that they obtain is only an ip address at which activities connected with child pornography take place. it is not known whether a victim s is are involved at this point. however the police are confronted with hundreds of proposals for investigation every year and consequently it is difficult to achieve the shift in focus from tackling possessors to actually tackling the producers. as a result of this searching for victims of sexual violence via the internet is not very effective. conversely every victim who is found means that the effort expended is justified. it is hoped that the new police structure may perhaps offer a solution. the new structure should certainly combine sex offence specialisms with digital and tactical expertise. the use of additional capacity is essential in this regard. the minister for security and justice has an nounced that additional capacity will be made available to tackle child pornography. the way in which this capacity is to be divided up must be taken into account. the pooling of expertise and competencies could also improve efficacy. the multi disciplinary team of the klpd under the management of the team leader from the team high tech crime uses a perpetrator oriented approach analysis of e mail and chatroom traffic of perpetrators which has added an additional dimension to the working process. the team beeld en internet images and internet team employs a primarily victim orientated policy mostly analysis of the images . perpetrator and victim orientated detection activities should be combined at a single site in which the competences in the digital domain should be merged with sex offence special isms. perpetrator networks must be fully investigated as part of which the children appearing in images of sexual abuse must also be taken into account. lessons learnt from the successful collaboration in the amsterdam sexual abuse case can be applied in this regard. a solution will also need to be found to two important challenges to the new police structure. the first challenge involves prioritisation. in general we can conclude that the majority of the regional police forces and the brts focus their activities on the processing of investigations without carrying out a more detailed investigation into the abuse. the tbi prioritises its work in conjunction with the national coordinating public prosecutor in child pornography cases but this prioritisation has been neither standardised nor described. the second challenge is the number of pending cases which forms a burden for the police and the judicial authorities. the proposed new structure does not yet offer any insight into the way in which those cases could be worked through other than adopting the alternative means of settling cases. no analysis of the nature of the pending cases is available and consequently conclusions and recommendations it is almost impossible to draft a policy. the minimal capacity available has also been designated as a cause for the number of pending cases. this is the issue however as the backlog of cases should increase if an additional to cases are received every year. this is not happening though although the number of pending cases cannot be controlled it is nevertheless relatively stable and even decreases now and then. an investigation of the inflow and outflow of the pending cases could provide an insight into this situation. the existence of pending cases may potentially be the result of the low priority that is assigned to child pornography cases the working method being used or the influx of investigations from other countries. the assumption that a shortage in capacity is the cause of the backlog of cases is partly unfounded. a potential solution could be to develop an international prioritisation model. to this end the possibilities for making international agreements in this regard could be explored further. two challenges that need to be dealt with regardless of changes to the police structure involve the ef fectiveness of victim identification. for this purpose parties could seek alignment with cases of sexual abuse in which data storage media must always be seized. after all seeking to identify victims via the internet is not always effective and it frequently occurs by chance. the implementation provisions con cerning child pornography now state that when forms of sexual violence against children are reported the possibility that child abuse material may have been produced must be taken into account at all stages of the investigation and a search must be carried out if possible. by emphasising the importance of seizure of data storage media in both the implementation provisions concerning child pornography and the implementation provisions concerning public decency offences the efficacy of detection can be improved and the focus can actually be shifted to the abuse. secondly more information regarding the effectiveness of detection needs to be collected. for example the number of victims that were found via the internet is practically unknown. for that reason details of victims must be recorded. as a result we will have greater insight into the effectiveness of detection which may have implications for the policy to be implemented. . . . prosecution and trial article b of the dutch criminal code encompasses various forms of conduct ranging from gaining access to and possession of child abuse material to its production and distribution. the formulation of the section of the law does not from the statistical material lay out how prosecution and trial relate to the various forms of conduct. a formulation consisting of various categories should be taken into con sideration. it is possible that the new forthcoming eu directive provides occasion for a re examination of the formulation of the current provision of penalties. the above distinction between various forms of conduct is also relevant for imposing sentences. in practice the court usually imposes a suspended custodial sentence in combination with a community service order. from the figures there appears to be a clear tendency towards imposing more severe sentences the proportion of non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences increased in the period between and and in a community service order was imposed less often as the main sentence. at present it is still unclear if and to what extent the possibilities for imposing community service orders will be limited in the future for cases involving a breach of article b of the dutch criminal code. limiting the possibilities to impose a community service order particularly if this would no longer be possible in combination with suspended sentences would in any case provide courts with fewer opportunities to tailor the sentence to the individual case. in this context possibilities for influencing behaviour by means of supervision on the basis of conditions imposed for a suspended sentence for example must also be taken into consideration. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur in june the government stated in a letter to the house of representatives that alternative meth ods of settling cases must be sought. this mainly concerns the possession of child abuse material. the distinction between the different forms of conduct is also relevant here. however the rationale behind abolishing or limiting the possibility to impose a community service order stricter sentencing does not seem to correspond with the alternative means of settlement which the public prosecution service and also the government are seeking namely for those offences contrary to article b of the dutch criminal code which are relatively mild cases such as the possession of a small quantity of material where the suspect has not had any previous involvement with the judiciary in this field. not all child pornography cases are the same. considering the scope and complexity of some cases it is necessary to consider whether this type of case should not also be made part of the remit of the national public prosecutor s offices so that the national public prosecutor s office can play a guiding role in extensive complex and cross border cases and can also be involved in the development of innovative detection methods. at present the prosecution of child pornography offences in the first instance is carried out exclusively at district court public prosecutor s offices. the handling of criminal cases raises a number of relatively new questions with regard to identified victims of child pornography. this involves victims who are by definition particularly vulnerable as they are always children. there is currently no statutory or other provision to guarantee the complete anonymity of victims in criminal proceedings in situations such as this and as such to protect the iden tity and personal details of victims. the way in which this can be achieved without this being contrary to article of the european convention of human rights must be investigated. an important question is how justice can also be done to victims when it is assumed that they will become victim time and time again as a result of the distribution of child abuse material revictimisation and what the consequences would be if it were possible for them to receive compensation. this should be investigated in more de tail. the judge in the amsterdam sexual abuse case is expected to deliver a judgment in the near future regarding the question as to whether parents of victims who are minors should be able to exercise the right to speak in criminal proceedings on behalf of their child. since july the state secretary for security and justice has been preparing a legislative proposal in which the parents of children younger than twelve can exercise the right to speak on behalf of their child. whether parents as such should be regarded as victims and whether they should for example also be granted the right to speak in this capacity and not just as a representative of their child should also be investigated. . . . after care and supervision the opportunities to provide supervision that are presented in this report focus primarily on supervision and after care within the judicial framework. this framework also has its limits. in the event that a custo dial sentence is imposed with a term longer than four years no part of this sentence may be suspended and special conditions cannot therefore be associated with this sentence. supervision and after care are therefore also not possible in this form. supervision of a convicted sex offender can also no longer be provided after execution of the sentence. unless placement under a hospital order has been imposed if a convicted perpetrator has served their sentence or if the conditional release period has expired it is not currently possible to enforce supervision and treatment within a judicial framework. from a scientific point of view it is regretted that there is no longer a compulsory framework for supervision and treatment. it is also interesting that the state secretary for security and justice has now indicated the need to carry out research into the possibility of extending life long supervision to the supervision of sex offenders who have completed their course of treatment under a hospital order. conclusions and recommendations an integrated approach with respect to convicted sex offenders is lacking. probation and after care the police the public prosecution service municipalities penal institutions the ministry of security and justice and the ministry of the interior and kingdom relations scenario teams safety houses the em ployee insurance agency the centre for work and income and community organisations such as housing associations and care institutions all play a role within the after care and supervision of convicted sex offenders and conflicts are sometimes unavoidable. for example an exclusion order issued by a munici pality to prevent social unrest may at the same time hinder probation and after care supervision. at the same time the institutions involved in the implementation are confronted with the complexity of the phenomenon of child pornography incomplete policies and problems in the implementation itself. the lack of a uniform national framework in the matter of after care and supervision of convicted offenders means that the regions need to learn how to deal with the above challenges themselves. collaborative associations such as safety houses scenario teams and dual track or multiple track teams already exist in individual regions in the netherlands in which involved institutions come together. those involved on the front line of such initiatives frequently state that the british supervision system mappa is desirable whilst in the same breath referring to the dutch safety houses and dutch implementation of the cosa project. central control by the probation and after care service is a component of mappa on a case level. the starting points formulated by the american center for sex offender management also seem to be of value to the dutch situation and are encountered in the implementation in various regions. les sons learnt in den bosch in the previously mentioned sexual abuse case of the swimming teacher benno l. were shared with authorities in amsterdam for the purpose of informing parents in the amsterdam sexual abuse case. the action plan to tackle child abuse also propagates co operation and an integrated approach. however this plan is aimed specifically at children and states the importance of co operation with organisations aimed at perpetrators but this is as yet not widely found in the various regions. an integrated approach is desirable and must be required to fulfil a number of conditions. the inte grated nature of the approach should become apparent through the coordination of all processes or ganisations involved judicial frameworks and requirements. this coordination should promote a focus on the victim the monitoring and evaluation of interventions specialised knowledge and the training of employees raising public awareness and co operation between organisations. the integrated nature of the approach should also emerge from policy that takes shape on both a national and regional level. this also means mutual coordination between the regions the problem does not disappear if the offender moves house or if an exclusion order is imposed it simply moves elsewhere. a national programme and or expertise centre as part of the dutch probation service as in the united states could form a national policy framework can serve as a key link between policy and implementation can collect best practices in the region and can link up with similar programmes and expertise centres within detection and prosecution programme of improvements in tackling child pornography in order to promote such an integrated approach. it is important that the specific problems surrounding youth sex offenders are also included. it is therefore not only a matter of youth sex offenders in the criminal justice chain but also those offenders who are treated under the forms of civil law. the organisation registration and generation of expertise within the juvenile probation service is also a matter that requires attention. . . . victim assistance considering the various aspects involved in being a victim of child pornography offences the provision of assistance is necessary in relation to the consequences of both the production of child abuse material as well as the distribution possession and viewing of that material. production almost always involves sexual child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur abuse. general and specialist facilities are available to provide such assistance for young children older children and parents of children. however the provision of assistance is barely designed for the possibility that the abuse takes place within the context of child pornography. there is little awareness of the possibil ity that the sexual abuse of children goes hand in hand with the production of images of this abuse and that this forms an additional dimension of being a victim of sexual abuse which requires integrated treatment. associated with this little is also known about the consequences of the distribution and possession of material that constitutes child pornography for the children who are victims of this offense and for their parents and few programmes of assistance exist that are directed at these aspects of being a victim. in more general terms little is specifically known about being a victim of sexual violence via the internet or about the inter relatedness that may exist between sexual abuse and online sexual violence. besides a few reporting and chat sites on the internet little in the way of assistance is on offer for victims of online sexual violence in the age group from twelve years upwards. the system of care provisions needs to form connections between offline and online forms of being a victim of sexual abuse and expertise needs to be built up with regard to effective methods and tech niques for the treatment of the consequences of online sexual violence. . . . public private sector partnerships various public private sector partnerships existing in the netherlands and in other countries are in the process of developing a variety of initiatives in order to combat child pornography. a possible focus and associated strategies can be derived from these interventions. it is therefore advisable to secure public private sector partnerships once again within a platform where the various forces at play can come together and can jointly give direction to this partnership. since the blocking of child abuse material in the netherlands was not implemented the internet safety platform of ecp epn no longer has an active working group that promotes public private sector part nerships in the field of child pornography. a similar consultative body could boost and give direction to public private sector partnerships and at the same time develop new initiatives and reinforce existing initiatives. one central point could also form a point of contact and assembly for public private sector partnerships and best practices from other countries. the internet safety platform of ecp epn which hosts the blocking child pornography and notice and take down working groups is an obvious choice to give direction to public private sector partnerships. in order to prevent initiatives from interfering with the focus of the police or overlapping with the barrier model that is currently being developed co ordination with the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography is desirable. it may well be that alongside the current internet safety platform and the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography the national cyber security centre can provide opportunities to encour age public private sector partnerships with regard to child pornography the internet community should also become more structurally involved in the efforts to tackle child pornography. . connections in the foregoing sections conclusions have been presented with regard to the constituent processes that form part of the implementation of the child pornography policy. however not everything has been covered here. it is also necessary to investigate the extent to which connections have been made between conclusions and recommendations and within the processes where this is necessary. furthermore it is also important that links exist be tween policy and implementation through which policy can be translated into practice and vice versa. connections between policy and implementation there are in any case several good examples of the latter connections the links that now exist be tween policy and implementation. the programme of improvements in tackling child pornography developed following a joint analysis of the problems in the approach to this issue by the police and the public prosecution service fulfils an important role for the practical implementation of the repressive approach. the internet safety platform administered by ecp epn is an example of an organisation in which the government s policy was able to be translated into practice and vice versa in this case with reference to public private sector partnership initiatives in the field of ict. connections within and between processes many collaborative initiatives have been developed over the years which have resulted in effective con nections being formed. so called scenario teams exist which respond by initiating the provision of as sistance within a region in the event that it is suspected that serious child sexual abuse has taken place as experience proves that situations involving serious child sexual abuse are very complex and require all institutions to work closely together. consequently connections are formed within the assistance services. however such scenario teams do not operate in all regions. multi disciplinary teams also exist which form connections between the processes. an example of this is the tilburg safety house. here a large number of organisations work together under one roof combining an approach that is in keeping with criminal law attention and care for perpetrators and the provision of assistance to victims. safety houses are not aimed at sex offenders in all regions. the youth and family centres also play an important connecting role. the protocol reports of child abuse sent by youth care agencies to the police and the public prosecution service is a fine example of cooperation between an organisation that provides assistance and the police. connections between the approach towards combating child pornography and the approach towards combating sexual violence despite the positive examples of connections described above it is apparent that the connections that ex ist between the approach towards tackling child pornography and the approach towards tackling sexual violence are still insufficient not only in so far as the policy agenda is concerned but also in the various implementation processes in general. in the provision of assistance to victims of sexual violence and in the after care for convicted sex offenders the understanding that the sexual violence in question can in part also have comprised behaviours that constitute a criminal offence in relation to child pornography is lack ing. in simple terms this means that these two notions in these processes are wrongly not considered in parallel with one another. the route linking sexual abuse to child pornography is therefore not pursued. vice versa the route leading from child pornography child abuse material to sexual abuse is not always pursued either. in particular this is often the case in the many cases in which sufficient information is avail able in order to take a suspect to court for possession of child abuse material. the case is then dealt with and the suspect may be prosecuted with no further investigations being carried out into the possibility of sexual abuse. in this case it is not so much a lack of understanding but rather a lack of capacity and priority that stand in the way of pursuing the route towards the offender and the victim of the underlying sexual abuse. . specification and recommendations the above findings present an image of a complex phenomenon that is extremely extensive and which cannot be controlled solely by repressive means. important steps have been taken to give substance to child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the protection of children against sexual violence and connections are being sought between policy frameworks as well as various implementing bodies. however the path towards tackling child pornogra phy is not synchronous with the path towards protecting children. this is not right and can and must be improved. the report concludes with recommendations for the government as well as with two figures in which the foregoing is displayed in concrete terms. it is recommended that an integrated approach to tackle sexual violence against children be provided into which the pro gramme of measures to tackle child pornography is fully integrated. clear coordination be provided in order to give substance to the integrated approach and to implement it. an independent monitoring mechanism be established. continuity be safeguarded. in the introduction an incomplete model figure . was used to show how the three aspects of child pornography perpetrators victims and technology relate to one another. in the intervention model the connections with other forms of sexual violence against children are also made visible. the capacity of being a perpetrator the situation of victimhood and the factor of technology converge in the dark blue area in the form of the production of child abuse material. the light blue areas indicate the routes by which such activity is identified and addressed. the sections of the circles that do not overlap with an other circle represent a situation in which no actual perpetrator or victim or recently produced material is found but which concerns old child abuse material and the capacity of being a potential perpetrator or a potential victim which includes the potential for recidivism of perpetrators and re victimisation of victims. the intervention model represents the focus and the perspective of the reporting task in relation to child pornography. the core focus is the protection of children from sexual violence. the production of child abuse material almost always goes hand in hand with such violence. a perspective which takes child pornography into account may prove useful in protecting children from sexual violence. in the intervention model figure . which has now been completed the findings from chapters and have been linked back more closely with the three aspects of child pornography perpetrators victims and technology. the types of intervention that could together form an integrated approach have been filled in so that all aspects of child pornography are covered. the connections model figure . presented hereafter subsequently specifies the interventions that could contribute to this and comprises specific recommendations that are connected with this. in effect the connections model reflects the integrated approach in so far as policy implementation and connections analogue and digital aspects and international and regional aspects are concerned therefore giving substance to the approach. it provides an insight into the areas where and the levels at which the approach needs to be integrated. it links in with the intervention model which illustrates where interventions are needed to address the basic aspects of perpetrators victims and technology. the connections model is a concrete extension of the intervention model and indicates which parties would be able to implement which interventions at which points in time and where the added value of collaboration and connections can be found. whereas the intervention model provides the routing in more abstract terms the connections model is intended as a practical guideline. conclusions and recommendations figure . intervention model interventions that connect the analogue world with the digital world in order to identify and combat current and or recent perpetrators and victims and recent material. interventions for the prevention identi cation and combating of low priority material material that is not recent and or victims who have already been identi ed in order to relieve the burden on investigative institutions and to prevent potential perpetrators and re victimisation of victims. interventions directed towards the development of digital reporting systems and digital frames of reference for institutions and the general public in order to identify and put an end to online victims and to provide adequate assistance to victims. interventions that in identifying and combating those who view child abuse material are able to e ectively distinguish between high and low risk of abuse in order to arrive at a victim oriented approach towards tackling child pornography. interventions directed towards potential victims and the general public in order to prevent individuals falling victim to child pornography. interventions directed towards providing assistance to victims of online sexual violence in order to deal with the consequences of being a victim and to prevent re victimisation. interventions directed towards potential perpetrators and possible situations in order to prevent o ences being commi ed. interventions directed towards convicted o enders in order to prevent recidivism. human tra cking sexual abuse o ences sexual abuse child abuse possible victims possible perpetrators production of child abuse material child abuse sexual abuse possession and distribution of child abuse material technology material constituting child abuse material and means of production distribution and possession the left column of figure . see following page displays the actions in the field of policy coordination research and international collaboration. the middle column lists a number of important organisations and initiatives that act as links between policy and implementation. these translate policy to implemen tation and vice versa. the right column displays the most urgent actions for implementation arranged according to the individual constituent processes as well as the ministries that are involved. this col umn also displays a number of organisations that serve as models for the connections that have already been formed between the various processes. going from left to right the model connects the policy actions with the implementation actions and going from right to left the relationship between the implementation actions and the policy is conveyed. finally the implementation column lists a number of additional organisations that form connecting links between the constituent processes. child pornography is a form of sexual violence against children. connections coordination and moni toring form the core elements of tackling child pornography. this report intends to provide a point of reference in the implementation of this programme. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur figure . connections model policy connection between policy implementation processes implementation processes scienceinternational forums integrated approach for tackling sexual violence against children evidence based digital and analogue cross border continuous independent monitoring coordination ministry of security and justice and ministry of health welfare and sport investigate the possibility of a national policy framework and expertise centre for the supervision and after care of convicted sex offenders. prevention youth and family centres identification combating dual track or multiple track teams municipal health service scenario team safety house provision of assistance supervision and after care public private sector partnerships dutch youth care agency netherlands youth institute police programme of improvements in tackling child pornography and public prosecution service dutch youth care agency movisie centre for social development netherlands youth institute the dutch probation service ecp epn platform for the information society police programme of improvements in tackling child pornography digitally skilled digitally aware expertise centre for ict in education expertise centre on sexual and reproductive health and rights ministry of economic affairs agriculture and innovation ministry of education culture and science expressly include the dangers of online behaviour in cluding child pornography in prevention projects aimed at children. ministry of social affairs and employment ministry of education culture and science ministry of health welfare and sport extend situational prevention to include all sectors that involve working with children. ministry of health welfare and sport ministry of security and justice promote stop it now for potential perpetrators also on digital channels. ministry of health welfare and sport introduce a public health model as a basis for a public prevention strategy in which attention is devoted to the nature of all forms of sexual violence against children. ministry of health welfare and sport invest in training for professionals in detecting digital signs of sexual violence against children improve registration of child pornography by institutions provid ing assistance including child abuse counselling and reporting centres kindertelefoon . continue the public campaign kindermishandeling wat kan ik doen child abuse what can i do paying atten tion to digital signs of sexual violence against children identification of perpetrators see prevention identifica tion of material see public private sector partnerships. ministry of security and justice combine offender oriented and victim oriented detec tion within a single national police unit always inves tigate networks of offenders comprehensively always seize data storage media of those suspected of sexual abuse explore the possibility of making arrangements in relation to limiting the international influx of proposals for investigation make the efficacy of detection trans parent by registering identified victims. also consider making child pornography part of the remit of the national public prosecutor s office investigate the possibility of extending the legal provisions for in direct victims such as the right to speak compensation and anonymity. ministry of health welfare and sport develop expertise with regard to and provide an assistance package for the consequences of the production of child abuse material sexual abuse as well as the distribution and possession of such material. ministry of security and justice investigate the possibilities of central control for supervi sion on a case level as exists in the united kingdom improve risk assessment instruments distinction be tween those who view child abuse material and hands on offenders record digital data investigate the desirability of limiting access to the internet. develop low intensity interventions for low risk viewers of child abuse material. ministry of economic affairs agriculture and innova tion ministry of security and justice safeguard public private sector partnerships within a platform once again and give direction to these part nerships which includes optimisation of the notice and take down regulation. figure . connections model policy connection between policy implementation processes implementation processes scienceinternational forums integrated approach for tackling sexual violence against children evidence based digital and analogue cross border continuous independent monitoring coordination ministry of security and justice and ministry of health welfare and sport investigate the possibility of a national policy framework and expertise centre for the supervision and after care of convicted sex offenders. prevention youth and family centres identification combating dual track or multiple track teams municipal health service scenario team safety house provision of assistance supervision and after care public private sector partnerships dutch youth care agency netherlands youth institute police programme of improvements in tackling child pornography and public prosecution service dutch youth care agency movisie centre for social development netherlands youth institute the dutch probation service ecp epn platform for the information society police programme of improvements in tackling child pornography digitally skilled digitally aware expertise centre for ict in education expertise centre on sexual and reproductive health and rights ministry of economic affairs agriculture and innovation ministry of education culture and science expressly include the dangers of online behaviour in cluding child pornography in prevention projects aimed at children. ministry of social affairs and employment ministry of education culture and science ministry of health welfare and sport extend situational prevention to include all sectors that involve working with children. ministry of health welfare and sport ministry of security and justice promote stop it now for potential perpetrators also on digital channels. ministry of health welfare and sport introduce a public health model as a basis for a public prevention strategy in which attention is devoted to the nature of all forms of sexual violence against children. ministry of health welfare and sport invest in training for professionals in detecting digital signs of sexual violence against children improve registration of child pornography by institutions provid ing assistance including child abuse counselling and reporting centres kindertelefoon . continue the public campaign kindermishandeling wat kan ik doen child abuse what can i do paying atten tion to digital signs of sexual violence against children identification of perpetrators see prevention identifica tion of material see public private sector partnerships. ministry of security and justice combine offender oriented and victim oriented detec tion within a single national police unit always inves tigate networks of offenders comprehensively always seize data storage media of those suspected of sexual abuse explore the possibility of making arrangements in relation to limiting the international influx of proposals for investigation make the efficacy of detection trans parent by registering identified victims. also consider making child pornography part of the remit of the national public prosecutor s office investigate the possibility of extending the legal provisions for in direct victims such as the right to speak compensation and anonymity. ministry of health welfare and sport develop expertise with regard to and provide an assistance package for the consequences of the production of child abuse material sexual abuse as well as the distribution and possession of such material. ministry of security and justice investigate the possibilities of central control for supervi sion on a case level as exists in the united kingdom improve risk assessment instruments distinction be tween those who view child abuse material and hands on offenders record digital data investigate the desirability of limiting access to the internet. develop low intensity interventions for low risk viewers of child abuse material. ministry of economic affairs agriculture and innova tion ministry of security and justice safeguard public private sector partnerships within a platform once again and give direction to these part nerships which includes optimisation of the notice and take down regulation. bibliography adler a. . the perverse law of child pornography. columbia law review . adviesbureau van montfoort reclassering nederland. . risc versie . . recidive inschattings schalen. handleiding. harderwijk flevodruk. ak zensur. . analysis of a representative example of european blacklists. see ak zensur.de analysis blacklists.pdf. akdeniz y. . internet child pornography and the law. national and international responses. farnham vk ashgate. amersfoort van p. smit l. rietveld m. . criminaliteit in de virtuele ruimte. amsterdam dsp groep. andersson elffers felix. . publiekprivate bestrijding van kinderporno op internet. een oplossingsrichting. str m k. rejmer a. . det blir nog b ttre f r barnen. slutrapport i utv rderingen av nationell f rs ks verksamhet med barnahus . lund zweden media tryck sociologen. baines v. . online child sexual abuse. the law enforcement response. ecpat international. bakker f. graaf de h. haas de s. kedde h. kruijer h. wijsen c. . seksuele gezondheid in neder land . utrecht rutgers nisso groep. bartol c. r. bartol a. m. . criminal behavior. a psychological approach. new jersey vs pearson education. bates a. saunders r. wilson c. . doing something about it. a follow up study of sex offenders participating in thames valley circles of support and accountability. british journal of community justice . beech a. r. elliot i. a. birgden a. findlater d. . the internet and child sexual offending. a criminological review. aggression and violent behavior . beek van d. . behandeling van zedendelinquenten. in a. ph. van wijk r. a. r. bullens p. van den eshof red. . facetten van zedencriminaliteit pp. . den haag reed business information. berenschot verwey jonker instituut. . effectevaluatie regionale aanpak kindermishandeling. eindrapportage. see www.missingkids.com en us documents fcacptrendsinonlinecrimepaper .pdf. bijleveld c. c. j. h. . methoden en technieken van onderzoek in de criminologie. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. bogaerts a. woude van der m. . community notification in nederland. een zegen of een nieuw risico proces tijdschrift voor berechting en reclassering . bonnici j. p. m. . self regulation in cyberspace. den haag t.m.c. asser press. bourke l. hernandez a. e. . the butner study redux. a report of the incidence of hands on child victimization by child pornography offenders. journal of family violence . bullens r. . kijken naar kinderporno op internet onschuldige drang in a. ph. van wijk r. a. r. bullens p. van den eshof red. . facetten van zedencriminaliteit pp. . den haag reed busi ness information. http ak zensur.de analysis blacklists.pdf http ak zensur.de analysis blacklists.pdf http www.missingkids.com en us documents fcacptrendsinonlinecrimepaper .pdf child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur bureau jeugdzorg agglomeratie amsterdam advies en meldpunt kindermishandeling amsterdam bu reau jeugdzorg noord holland advies en meldpunt kindermishandeling noord holland. . protocol kindermishandeling voor alle beroepskrachten die werken met kinderen tot jaar en of hun ouders. burgess a. w. . child pornography and sex rings. new york vs lexington books. callanan c. gercke m. marco de e. dries ziekenheiner h. . internet blocking. balancing cybercrime responses in democratic societies. aconite internet solutions. capgemini. . trends in veiligheid . samen werken aan veiligheid. caspers j. . circles nl informatie voor beroepskrachten in de buitencirkel cosa. cirkels voor ondersteuning samenwerking en aanspreekbaarheid in nederland. expertisecentrum veiligheid avans hogeschool reclas sering nederland. caspers j. h ing m. vogelvang b. . proefimplementatie cosa. managementsamenvatting van de tus senrapportage van de procesevaluatie. den bosch programmabureau circles nl. center for sex offender management. a . enhancing the management of adult and juvenile sex offenders. a handbook for policymakers and practitioners. see www.csom.org pubs csom handbook.pdf. center for sex offender management. b . the comprehensive assessment protocol. a systemwide review of adult and juvenile sex offender management strategies cap . ceop. . iyac children and young persons global online charter. supplementary document. see www.ceop. police.uk documents iyac charter supp.pdf. child helpline international. . violence against children. fourth child helpline international report. see www.childhelplineinternational.org ... fourth vac report english final copy.pdf. cleiren c. p. m. verpalen m. j. m. red. . . tekst en commentaar strafrecht. deventer kluwer. cornelissens a. ferwerda h. . burgerparticipatie in de opsporing een onderzoek naar aard werkwijzen en opbrengsten. amsterdam reed business. cot instituut voor veiligheids en crisismanagement. . als maatschappelijke onrust dreigt. evaluatie van het optreden van de autoriteiten naar aanleiding van de arrestatie van benno l. see www.cot.nl pdf als maatschappelijke onrust dreigt.pdf. creighton s. j. . prevalence and incidence of child abuse. international comparisons. davidson j. gottschalk p. . internet child abuse. current research and policy. oxon vk routledge. dijk van t. flight s. oppenhuis s. duesmann b. . huiselijk geweld aard omvang en hulpverlening. den haag ministerie van justitie. ecpat international. . regional overview on child sexual abuse images through the use of information and communication technologies in belarus moldova russia and ukraine. ecpat international. . ecpat consultation on child sex tourism in india nepal and sri lanka. ecpat nederland. . kindersekstoerisme vanuit nederland. onderzoek naar bestaande en mogelijk nieuwe reisbestemmingen. ecp epn. . jaarverslag . ecp epn. . jaarverslag . eijk van n. engers van t. . op zoek naar evenwicht een onderzoek naar zorgplichten op het internet. am sterdam universiteit van amsterdam. enders slegers m. j. janssen m. . cirkel van geweld. verbanden tussen dierenmishandeling en huiselijk geweld. amsterdam stichting dierzijn. endrass j. urbaniok f. hammermeister l. c. benz c. elbert t. laubacher a. rossegger a. . the consumption of internet child pornography and violent and sex offending. bmc psychiatry . erents p. hertzscholdt s. zee van der t. . professionalisering aanpak kinderporno. klpd dnri. european digital rights. . the slide from self regulation to corporate censorship. http www.csom.org pubs csom handbook.pdf http www.ceop.police.uk documents iyac charter supp.pdf http www.ceop.police.uk documents iyac charter supp.pdf http www.childhelplineinternational.org ... fourth vac report english final copy.pdf http www.cot.nl pdf als maatschappelijke onrust dreigt.pdf bibliography european financial coalition. . months on. a combined report from the european financial coalition . an intelligence assessment on the commercial distribution of child sexual abuse images. a progress re port on the work of the european financial coalition. see www.ceop.police.uk documents efc strat asses b final.pdf. ferraro m. m. casey e. . investigating child exploitation and pornography. burlington vs elsevier academic press. ferwerda h. . binnen zonder kloppen. omvang aard en achtergronden van huiselijk geweld in op basis van landelijke politiecijfers. dordrecht advies en onderzoeksgroep beke. financial coalition against child pornography. . report on trends in online crime and their potential impli cations in the fight against commercial child pornography. finkelhor d. . current information on the scope and nature of child sexual abuse. the future of children . finkelhor d. . the prevention of childhood sexual abuse. the future of children . finkelhor d. araji s. baron l. browne a. peters s. d. wyatt g. e. . a sourcebook on child sexual abuse. newbury park vs sage publications. finkelhor d. mitchell k. j. wolak j. . online victimization. a report on the nation s youth yiss . national centre for missing exploited children. gallagher b. . the extent and nature of known cases of institutional child sexual abuse. british journal of social work . gercke m. . obligations of internet service provider in the fight against child pornography. com puter law review international . gezondheidsraad. . werkprogramma . gezondheidsraad. . behandeling van de gevolgen van kindermishandeling. ggz. . jeugd ggz. investeren in de toekomst. utrecht zuidamuithof drukkerijen. govcert. . jaarverslag . graaf de h. vanwesenbeeck i. . seks is een game . gewenste en ongewenste seksuele ervaringen van jongeren op internet. rutgers nisso groep. groeneveld c. . kinderporno en ontuchtzaken. problemen bij de opsporing. justiti le verkenningen . gunning schepers l. j. schaardenburg van louwe kooijmans e. j. naey j. . rapport onafhan kelijke commissie onderzoek zedenzaak amsterdam. amsterdam commissie gunning. harte j. m. kalmthout van w. d. kn ppe j. j. m. c. . forensisch psychiatrisch toezicht. evaluatie van de testfase van een vernieuwde vorm van toezicht op tbs gestelden. amsterdam faculteit der rechtsgeleerdheid afdeling criminologie vu . hecht m. e. . private sector accountability in combating the commercial sexual exploitation of children. see www.ecpat.net worldcongressiii pdf publications csr thematic paper csr eng.pdf. henriques a. . csr and the role of the private sector in the sexual exploitation of children. unicef. see www. iin.oea.org iin english pdf thematic paper csr eng.pdf. het programmaministerie voor jeugd en gezin. . samenwerken voor de jeugd. voortgang projecten jeugd en gezin. h ing m. caspers j. vogelvang b. . circles nl. aanpassingsstudie naar cosa cirkels voor ondersteuning samenwerking en aanspreekbaarheid in nederland. den bosch programmabureau circles nl. holt t. j. blevins k. r. burkert n. . considering the pedophile subculture online. sexual abuse a journal of research and treatment . horn van j. . risicotaxatie in de forensische psychiatrie. in a. ph. van wijk r. a. r. bullens p. van den eshof red. . facetten van zedencriminaliteit pp. . den haag reed business information. http www.ceop.police.uk documents efc strat asses b final.pdf http www.ecpat.net worldcongressiii pdf publications csr thematic paper csr eng.pdf http www.iin.oea.org iin english pdf thematic paper csr eng.pdf http www.iin.oea.org iin english pdf thematic paper csr eng.pdf child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur hulst van der r. c. neve r. j. m. . high tech crime soorten criminaliteit en hun daders een literatuurin ventarisatie. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. icmec. . child pornography. model legislation global review. alexandria vs the koons family institute on international law policy. inhope. . global internet trend report. trends associated with illegal content on the internet based on the experiences of the inhope international network of internet hotlines. september december . inhope. . inhope annual report . inspectie openbare orde en veiligheid. . de politi le en justiti le zedentaak. stand van zaken. den haag hega offset. internet watch foundation. . internet watch foundation. annual and charity report . internet watch foundation. . internet watch foundation. annual and charity report . interpol. . interpol annual report . interpol. . interpol annual report . jahae j. i. m. g. . et. in zeden. strafprocessen van de eeuw. topadvocaten schrijven misdaadgeschiedenis pp. . leeuwarden uitgeverij vuyk co. jenkins p. . beyond tolerance. child pornography on the internet. new york vs new york university press. kaufman k. l. mosher h. carter m. estes l. . an empirically based situational prevention model for child sexual abuse. crime prevention studies . klpd dienst ipol. . nationaal dreigingsbeeld . georganiseerde criminaliteit. klpd dienst nationale recherche. . high tech crime. criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse niet openbaar . knibbe a. . publiek private samenwerking. alphen aan den rijn kluwer. knmg. . artsen en kindermishandeling. meldcode en stappenplan. kooijman k. baat de m. linden van der p. . regionale aanpak kindermishandeling in . utrecht nederlands jeugd instituut. koops b. j. . sex kids and crime in cyberspace. some reflections on crossing boundaries. in a. r. lodder a. oskamp red. . caught in the cyber crime act. opstellen aangeboden aan prof. mr. h.w.k. kasperen pp. . deventer kluwer. koppen van c. . art. b sr. kinderpornografie. een overzicht van wetgeving jurisprudentie en actuele proble matiek. amsterdam faculteit der rechtsgeleerdheid vu . kuyper l. wit de j. adam p. woertman l. berlo van w. . het vervolg op laat je nu horen . utrecht universiteit utrecht rutgers wpf. kuyper l. wit de j. adam p. woertman l. berlo van w. . laat je nu horen een onderzoek naar grensoverschrijdende seksuele ervaringen en gedragingen onder jongeren. utrecht universiteit utrecht. landelijk bureau kindertelefoon. . jaarverslag . landelijk project kinderporno. . verbeterprogramma kinderporno op beeld vastgelegd seksueel misbruik van kinderen. klpd. lanning k. v. . child molesters a behavioral analysis. for professionals investigating the sexual exploitation of children. national centre for missing exploited children. leary m. g. . self produced child pornography. the appropriate societal response to juvenile self exploitation. virginia journal of social policy and the law . lenhart a. . teens and sexting. how and why minor teens are sending sexually suggestive nude or nearly nude images via text messaging. washington vs pew research center. lessig l. . the future of ideas. new york vs random house. leukfeldt e. r. domenie m. m. l. stol w. ph. . cybercrime in nederland verspreiding van kinderporno en haatzaaien. het tijdschrift voor de politie . bibliography leukfeldt e. r. domenie m. m. l. stol w. ph. . verkenning cybercrime in nederland . den haag boom juridische uitgevers. leuw e. bijl r. v. daalder a. . pedoseksuele delinquentie. den haag wodc. liberatore m. levine b. n. shields c. . strengthening forensic investigations of child pornography on p p networks. philadelphia vs acm conext. livingstone s. haddon l. g rzig a. lafsson k. . risks and safety on the internet. the perspective of european children. full findings. londen vk london school of economics eu kids online. lounsbury k. mitchell k. j. finkelhor d. . factsheet the true prevalence of sexting . crimes against children research centre. l nnemann k. nieborg s. goderie m. kool r. beijers g. . kinderen beschermd tegen seksueel misbruik. evaluatie van de parti le wijziging in de zedelijkheidswetgeving. utrecht verwey jonker instituut. malsch m. alberts w. c. keijser de j. w. nijboer j. f. . strafrechtelijke ontzetting uit beroep of ambt. oplegging en naleving in de periode . den haag wodc. malsch m. alberts w. c. keijser de j. w. nijboer j. f. . ontzetting uit beroep of ambt. herleving van een weinig gebruikte straf justiti le verkenningen . marle van h. mulder e. . monitoring toezicht en begeleiding bij re integratie van zedende linquenten. in a. ph. van wijk r. a. r. bullens p. van den eshof red. . facetten van zedencriminaliteit pp. . den haag reed business information. mathiason j. miller m. klein h. holitscher m. mcknight l. . internet governance. the state of play. the internet governance project. see www.internetgovernance.org pdf ig sop final.pdf. mclaughlin j. h. . crime and punishment. teen sexting in context. penn state law review . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. . jaarverslag . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. . jaarverslag . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. . jaarverslag . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. . jaarverslag . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. . jaarverslag . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. . jaarverslag . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. . jaarverslag . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. a . jaarverslag . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. b . voortgangsrapport filterlijst niet openbaar . meldpunt kinderporno op internet. . jaarverslag . meulmeester g. rijsbosch e. mcdevitt pugh l. wieringa s. cense m. h ing m. vlugt van der i. . mapping van bestaande projecten en initiatieven op het gebied van seksuele weerbaarheid. am sterdam internationaal informatiecentrum en archief voor de vrouwenbeweging rutgers nisso groep. ministerie van justitie. . nationaal actieplan bestrijding seksueel geweld tegen kinderen . ministerie van justitie. a . eindrapportage nationaal actieplan aanpak seksueel misbruik van kinderen . ministerie van justitie. b . priv geweld publieke zaak een nota over de gezamenlijke aanpak van huiselijk geweld. ministerie van justitie. . samen effectief de praktijk als inspiratie. ministerie van justitie. . stand van zaken aanpak kinderporno. overzicht van aspiraties beleidsvoornemens en inzet vanaf tot heden justitie politie om en doorkijk naar de toekomst. den haag ministerie van justitie. ministerie van volksgezondheid welzijn en sport. . basismodel meldcode huiselijk geweld en kindermis handeling. stappenplan voor het handelen bij signalen van huiselijk geweld en kindermishandeling. http www.internetgovernance.org pdf ig sop final.pdf child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur mitchell k.j. jones l. m. finkelhor d. wolak j. . internet facilitated commercial sexual ex ploitation of children. findings from a nationally representative sample of law enforcement agencies in the united states. sexual abuse . mogroep jeugdzorg. . advies en meldpunten kindermishandeling overzicht . moran m. . online child abuse material offenders. are we assigning law enforcement expertise appropriately dublin ierland university college dublin. motivaction. . bouwstenen voor de campagne kindermishandeling. movisie. . experts over ontwikkelingen en trends in seks en seksueel geweld. muir d. . violence in cyberspace. bangkok thailand ecpat international. mulder de r. v. kleve p. noortwijk van c. . ict criminaliteit. in e. r. muller j. p. van der leun l. m. moerings p. j. v. van calster red. . criminaliteit. criminaliteit en criminaliteitsbestrijding in nederland pp. . alphen aan den rijn kluwer. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel. . mensenhandel. derde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur. den haag bnrm. national cyber security strategie. . slagkracht door samenwerking. nicc. . jaarbericht nicc . samen tegen cybercrime. nyman a. . abused online. sterg tland zweden bup elefanten child and adolescent psychia tric unit the county council of sterg tland. o reilly g. carr a. bullens r. . ontwikkelingsmodellen seksueel misbruik. in a. ph. van wijk r. a. r. bullens p. van den eshof red. . facetten van zedencriminaliteit pp. . den haag reed business information. o donnell i. milner c. herziene druk . child pornography crime computers and society. cul lompton vk willan publishing. openbaar ministerie. . jaarbericht . openbaar ministerie. . jaarbericht . ost s. . child pornography and sexual grooming. legal and societal responses. cambridge vk university press. pel van a. a. wever j. c. smit l. . de stappen van publiek private samenwerking. zeist uitgeverij kerckebosch. poort r. eppink k. . een literatuuronderzoek naar de effectiviteit van de reclassering. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. poort r. . fundamenten voor toezicht. over de grondslagen voor de ontwikkeling van reclasseringstoezicht. utrecht reclassering nederland stichting verslavingsreclassering ggz leger des heils jeugdzorg en reclassering. programma verbeteren aanpak kinderporno. . korpsmonitor kinderporno. stand van zaken landelijk beeld . programma verbeteren aanpak kinderporno. . korpsmonitor kinderporno. stand van zaken korpsen . putnam f. w. . ten year research update review child sexual abuse. journal of the american academy of child adolescent psychiatry . quayle e. taylor m. . child seduction and self representation on the internet. cyberpsychology behavior . quayle e. loof l. palmer t. . child pornography and sexual exploitation of children online. ecpat international. reclassering nederland. . jaarverslag . naar de kern. ander gedrag. r mkens r. . geweld in de huiselijke sfeer. in i. boerefijn m. van de liet senders t. loenen bibliography red. . het voorkomen en bestrijden van geweld tegen vrouwen. een verdiepend onderzoek naar het nederlandse beleid in het licht van de verplichtingen die voortvloeien uit het vrouwenverdrag pp. . den haag ministerie van sociale zaken en werkgelegenheid. r mkens r. . omstreden gelijkheid. over de constructie van on gelijkheid van vrouwen en man nen in partnergeweld. justiti le verkenningen . roos de th. . nieuwe accenten in het criminaliseringsbeleid. risicobeheersing en bescherming van kwetsbaren. justiti le verkenningen . rossen b. schuijer j. red. . . het seksuele gevaar voor kinderen. amsterdam swets zeilinger. rutgers nisso groep soa aids nederland. . factsheet seks onder je e. rutgers nisso groep. . seksuele gezondheid in nederland . delft eburon. save the children europe. . visible evidence forgotten children. the need for a child protection and children s rights focus in identifying children who have been sexually abused for the production of child abuse images. brussel belgi save the children europe group. savornin lohman de p. m. slump g. j. hommes a. c. t. goes a. m. a. h. . zedenalmanak. deel i achtergronden. den haag ministerie van justitie directie jeugd en criminaliteitspreventie. schotel van der veer k. . landelijk specialisme behandeling van jongeren met ernstige seksuele problematiek. jongerenhuis harreveld. seigfried k. c. lovely r. w. rogers m. k. . self reported online child pornography behavior. a psychological analysis. international journal of cyber criminology . seto m. c. hanson r. k. babchishin k. m. . contact sexual offending by men with online sexual offenses. sexual abuse a journal of research and treatment . simon l. m. j. zgoba k. . sex crimes against children legislation prevention and investigation. crime prevention studies . smallbone s. marshall w. l. wortley r. . preventing child sexual abuse. evidence policy and practice. devon vk willan publishing. solum l. b. . models of internet governance. in l. a. bygrave j. bing red. . internet governance infrastructure and institutions pp. . oxford vk oxford university press. sommer p. brown i. . reducing systemic cybersecurity risk. oecd. steel c. m. s. . child pornography in peer to peer networks. child abuse neglect . stichting ambulante fiom rutgers nisso groep transact. . aanpak van seksueel geweld in neder land. stand van zaken en aanbevelingen voor beleid onderzoek preventie en hulpverlening. see www.movisie.nl onderwerpen seksueel geweld docs aanpak seksueel geweld notitie b d.pdf. stichting profits for the world s children. . kinderpornografie en internet in nederland. een overzicht van de huidige situatie. knelpunten in de bestrijding. suggesties voor verbeteringen. haarlem copy copy. stol w. . cybersafety overwogen. een introductie in twee lezingen. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. stol w. ph. . trends in cybercrime. justiti le verkenningen . stol w. ph. kaspersen h. w. k. kerstens j. leukfeldt e. r. lodder a. r. . filteren van kinderporno op internet. een verkenning van technieken en reguleringen in binnen en buitenland. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. stoltenborgh m. ijzendoorn van m. h. euser e. m. bakermans kranenburg m. j. . a global perspective on child sexual abuse meta analysis of prevalence around the world. child maltreatment . stop it now uk ireland. . stop it now helpline report . together we can prevent child sexual abuse. tate t. . child pornography. an investigation. londen vk methuan london. http www.movisie.nl onderwerpen seksueel geweld docs aanpak seksueel geweld notitie b d.pdf http www.movisie.nl onderwerpen seksueel geweld docs aanpak seksueel geweld notitie b d.pdf child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur tavkar p. . psychological and support characteristics of parents of child sexual abuse. relationship with child functioning and treatment. lincoln vs university of nebraska. taylor m. quayle e. . child pornography. an internet crime. east sussex vk brunner routledge. taylor m. quayle e. . the internet and abuse images of children search pre criminal situations and opportunity. crime prevention studies . taylor m. holland g. quayle e. . typology of paedophile picture collections. the police journal . the working group on internet governance. . final report. tmt. . twee of meersporenteam. seksueel misbruik in een afhankelijkheidsrelatie. jaarverslag . amsterdam ggd. u.s. department of justice. . the national strategy for child exploitation prevention and interdiction. a report to congress. see www.projectsafechildhood.gov docs natstrategyreport.pdf. unabh ngige beauftragte zur aufarbeitung des sexuellen kindesmissbrauchs. . abschlussber icht der unabh ngigen beauftragten zur aufarbeitung des sexuellen kindesmissbrauchs dr. christine berg mann. see beauftragte missbrauch.de file.php abschlussbericht ubskm. .pdf bcsi scan bbc f f e c bcsi scan filename abschlussbericht ubskm. .pdf. unicef nederland defence for children. . jaarbericht kinderrechten . vasterman p. . mediahype. amsterdam aksant. vogelvang b. . de jongere aanspreken. handboek methode jeugdreclassering. utrecht maatschappelijke ondernemersgroep. weesepoel d. . cyberseks of kinderporno een onderzoek naar het seksuele gedrag van jongeren op internet en de toepasbaarheid van kinderporno. driebergen politieacademie. weiler von j. haardt becker a. schulte s. . care and treatment of child victims of child porno graphic exploitation cpe in germany. journal of sexual aggression . werkgroep kinderporno en kinderprostitutie in nederland. . kinderporno en kinderprostitutie in neder land. de stand van zaken. utrecht transact. wiarda j. j. . onderzoek naar seksueel misbruik van kinderen die onder verantwoordelijkheid van de over heid zijn gep laatst in instellingen en bij pleegouders. beschrijving van het relevante juridische kader. den haag commissie samson. wijk van a. ph. nieuwenhuis a. . lastige verhalen. een exploratief onderzoek naar valse aangiften van zedenmisdrijven door meisjes van jaar. arnhem bureau beke. wijk van a. ph. . downloaders van kinderporno een overzicht van de literatuur. tijdschrift voor veiligheid . wijk van a. ph. nieuwenhuis a. smeltink a. . achter de schermen. een verkennend onderzoek naar downloaders van kinderporno. arnhem bureau beke. wilson r. picheca j. prinzo m. . evaluating the effectiveness of professionally facilitated vo lunteerism in the community based management of high risk sex offenders part two. effects on participants and stakeholders. the howard journal . wit de l. a. j. m. craemer r. w. m. heesters j. m. c. m. knoet vrehen o. m. h. rijk m. j. m. . verslag van de werkgroep kinderpornografie. den haag ministerie van justitie. wodc. . jaarbericht . wolak j. finkelhor d. mitchel k. j. ybarra m. l. . online predators and their victims myths realities and implications for prevention and treatment. american psychologist . wolak j. mitchell k. finkelhor d. . online victimization of youth. five years later yiss . national center for missing exploited children. wondracek g. holz t. platzer c. kirda e. kruegel c. . is the internet for porn an insight into the online adult industry. vienna oostenrijk technical university vienna. http www.projectsafechildhood.gov docs natstrategyreport.pdf http beauftragte missbrauch.de file.php abschlussbericht ubskm. .pdf bcsi scan bbc f f e c bcsi scan filename abschlussbericht ubskm. .pdf bibliography world health organisation. . who multi country study on women s health and domestic violence against women initial results on prevalence health outcomes and women s responses. wortley r. smallbone s. . child pornography on the internet. zee van der s. groeneveld c. . kinderpornografisch beeldmateriaal. in a. ph. van wijk r. a. r. bullens p. van den eshof red. . facetten van zedencriminaliteit pp. . den haag reed business information. zorg en veiligheidshuis tilburg. . jaarplan . bibliography appendix appendix copine scale appendix justification of research methods used appendix explanatory notes to tables figures and statistics appendix supplementary tables a copine scale level name description of picture qualities indicative non erotic and non sexualised pictures showing children in their underwear swimming costumes etc. from either commercial sources or family albums pictures of children playing in normal settings in which the context or organisation of pictures by the collector indicates inappropriateness nudist pictures of naked or semi naked children in appropriate nudist settings and from legitimate sources. erotica surreptitiously taken photographs of children in play areas or other safe environments showing either underwear or varying degrees of nakedness. posing deliberately posed pictures of children fully partially clothed or naked where the amount context and organisation suggests sexual interest . erotic posing deliberately posed pictures of fully partially clothed or naked children in sexualised or provocative poses. explicit erotic posing emphasising genital areas where the child is either naked partially or fully clothed. explicit sexual activity involves touching mutual and self masturbation oral sex and inter course by child not involving an adult. assault pictures of children being subject to a sexual assault involving digital touching involving an adult. gross assault grossly obscene pictures of sexual assault involving penetrative sex masturbation or oral sex involving an adult. sadistic bestiality a. pictures showing a child being tied bound beaten whipped or other wise subject to something that implies pain. b. pictures where an animal is involved in some form of sexual behav iour with a child. source taylor quayle a justification of research methods used the amk study objective the intention of the exploratory study was to gain an insight into the expertise possessed by amk advies en meldpunt kindermishandeling child abuse counselling and reporting centre employees and the way in which they deal with cases of sexual abuse in relation to child pornography and other digital signs of the sexual abuse of children. research question to what extent are amk employees attentive to child pornography and on a wider scale digital signs of the sexual abuse of children this primary research question was investigated on the basis of the following set of questions . when reports involving the sexual abuse of children are made is it routine for amk employees to ask whether images of this abuse were made closed question yes no . have reports ever been made in which child pornography was specifically mentioned but where amk employees had not asked about this closed question yes no . approximately how many reports involving child pornography are made each year . how do amk employees deal with cases of child pornography both in terms of the provision of assistance as well with regard to the police. . do amk employees have sufficient knowledge of the possible digital signs of the sexual abuse of children possibly as a result of following courses training sessions etc. . when reports involving the sexual abuse of children are made do amk employees also go on to ask about possible digital signs of this abuse that would be able to support the suspicion of abuse closed question yes no . have reports involving the sexual abuse of children ever been made in which digital signs of such abuse were specifically mentioned but where amk employees had not asked about this closed question yes no . approximately how many reports of the sexual abuse of children are made each year in which amongst other things digital signs of such abuse are involved child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur research method for the purpose of this research and with support from the youth care organisation jeugdzorg nederland bnrm approached all access managers of the amks in the netherlands and the stichting gereformeerd jeugdwelzijn amersfoort foundation for dutch reformed church youth welfare amersfoort and re quested them to complete the set of questions stated above. the following amks responded to this request friesland groningen drenthe overijssel gelderland flevoland utrecht noord holland rotterdam noordoever haaglanden zuid holland west brabant midden brabant zuidoost brabant noordoost brabant den bosch noordoost brabant oss uden noord and midden limburg and zuid limburg. the noord and midden limburg and zuid limburg amks completed one set of ques tions between them meaning that the research is based on completed sets of questions which are considered representative of all amks in the netherlands. the public prosecution service data and investigation research and policy database for judicial documentation study research method the information in . . . . . . and . . . is based on data from the public prosecution ser vice this is the national pool of data that contains information from the district court public pros ecutor s offices and courts about the prosecution and trial of suspects and convicted perpetrators in the first instance. the total pool of data from the public prosecution service enables the cases to be selected in which amongst others the offence of child pornography has been recorded article b of the dutch criminal code . the secondary analyses of the subcategory of data concerning child pornography were carried out by the statistical information and policy analysis division statistische informatie en beleidsanalyse siba of the research and documentation centre wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documentatiecentrum wodc . this also applies to the information derived from the research and policy database for judicial documentation . . . . the research and policy database for judicial documentation is a database intended for academic research and the development and monitoring of policy. the database is updated periodically with information from the criminal records system justitieel documentatiesysteem jds . comments regarding the statistics it is possible that the data presented in . . originating from the subcategory of data concerning child pornography does not concern all individuals suspected and convicted of child pornography offences. in individual cases it is sometimes the case that when charges are made for multiple offences only the first offence is registered in the public prosecution service records. in addition to this data from the public prosecution service is not up to date and is therefore incomplete in particular with regard this is not an amk but a christian youth care organisation that operates nationally. in exactly the same way as amks it provides a point of contact for youth care in this case christian youth care and was therefore also included in this research. incidentally only primary offences for which charges are made are included in data recorded by the public prosecution service. however considering the fact that it is highly unlikely that a charge is made for an offence relating to child pornography as an alternative to another criminal offence this is not important for the child pornography offences that have been recorded. justification of research methods used to recent statistics. the research and policy database for judicial documentation has an even greater backlog to deal with. in this instance the reference date that has been set for statistics from the public prosecution service as well as those from the research and policy database for judicial documentation is january . it is also necessary to consider that the statistics from the public prosecution service that represent the year will probably be higher at a subsequent reference date. with regard to the figures from the research and policy database for judicial documentation the decision was taken to disre gard the year . the public prosecution service is currently involved in the transition from compas the old recording system to the new integrated process system ge ntegreerd processysteem strafrecht gps systeem . data from the public prosecution service is fed into compas as well as the integrated process system. however a transitional phase in recording always carries the risk of additional contamination of data. the statistics for and have been affected by this making them more difficult to com pare to data from previous years. the probation study research method the information in . . and in appendix table b . is derived from the joint client monitoring system of the three probationary institutions in the netherlands the dutch probation service reclas sering nederland the salvation army het leger des heils and the netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care ggz nederland . in the client monitoring system the suspects and convicted perpetrators who are registered with the probation and after care services in connection with child pornography offences amongst other offences can be selected. the analyses with regard to the cli ents with offenses related to child pornography were carried out by the dutch probation service at the request of bnrm. comments regarding the statistics it is possible that the number of clients with offenses that were in any case related to child por nography as stated in the statistics who were registered with probation and after care services in connection with child pornography in does not include only those suspects and convicted perpetrators who were ultimately referred to the probation and after care service in connection with a child pornography offence amongst other offences . in fact the client monitoring system only allows you to make a choice based on the first three numbers of an article number. in this way child pornography article b of the dutch criminal code falls under offence number . however by the integrated process system was already the biggest supplier of the public prosecution ser vice data. as a result of this situation there appears to be a larger decrease in the number of cases than was actu ally the case. this is the professional organisation for psychological care and addiction care in the netherlands. in the event that is present in at least one of the maximum of five recorded offence codes in the client monitoring system. incidentally if a case involves more than four different offences in addition to child pornography that are more serious than child pornography the offence code for child pornography will therefore not be recorded. however situations such as this will very rarely arise. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur the cases selected in this instance could also relate to article of the dutch criminal code publicly displaying an indecent image or object or sending an indecent image or object without being asked to do so or article a of the dutch criminal code showing an image that is harmful to people under years of age to a person under years of age . it is important that this is taken into consideration. however for reasons of clarity when offence code is used in . . only child pornography will be discussed. nb in there were cases that were recorded with the public prosecution service and cases that were concluded by the court in the first instance in which article of the dutch criminal code and or article a of the dutch criminal code were involved but where article b of the dutch criminal code was not involved source data from the public prosecution service . it is not clear how many of these cases were ultimately referred to the probation and after care services. a explanatory notes to tables figures and statistics explanatory notes to tables this report contains a number of tables. several remarks that are of importance when interpreting these tables are given below. as a result of numbers being rounded off the sub percentages in the tables do not always add up to . of course the total does really amount to and is therefore also listed accordingly. if numbers are displayed in a column of a table the letter n for number is used in the header of the corresponding table. if a ranking is given in a column of a table the letter r for rank is used in the header of the corresponding table. in the tables a dash is used to indicate that the number is zero and likewise to indicate that the corresponding percentage is . if the number is higher than zero but the percentage ends up at after rounding off is displayed instead of a hyphen. explanatory notes to figures this report contains a number of tables that are based on the supplementary tables from appendix . several remarks that are of importance when interpreting these figures are given below. if a develop ment is represented in absolute terms numbers a line graph is used. if multiple lines are displayed on one graph this represents developments that can be compared against each other. if a development is represented in relative terms proportions a histogram is used. if an overview over a certain period in time is represented a pie chart is used. explanatory notes to statistics some tables provide an index figure. the index figure is used to show the degree to which the number of suspects for example has changed in a certain year in relation to a base year. the year that has been taken as a base year is stated in the header of the table. this year is set to . . an index figure greater than . displays an increase in relation to the base year and an index figure lower than . displays a decrease. a supplementary tables supplement to . . . the hotline combating child pornography on the internet tables b . up to and including b . provide a complete and detailed overview of the statistical data originating from the annual reports of the hotline combating child pornography on the internet which form the basis for the figures in . . . . please refer to appendix for the explanatory notes to the tables displayed in this appendix. table b . annual number of reports to the hotline combating child pornography on the internet including content reported in duplicate n n n n n n number of reports via inhope . . . . . . . . . source hotline combating child pornography on the internet annual reports to inclusive table b . annual reports including content reported in duplicate according to place where found website email news group chat peer to peer other total source hotline combating child pornography on the internet annual reports to inclusive including questions supposed child pornography received by telephone and in including reports of supposed child pornography where the reported place where found is not accessible. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table b . proportion of unique reports according to the type of content reported compared with the total number of unique reports child pornography child erotica child nudism adult pornography not found accessible other total source hotline combating child pornography on the internet annual reports to inclusive table b . proportion of unique reports of child pornography on servers hosted in the netherlands compared with the total number of unique reports of child pornography n n n n n n child pornography on servers hosted in the netherlands . . . . . . . . source hotline combating child pornography on the internet annual reports to inclusive i.e. excluding content reported in duplicate. of reports involve unique content constituting a criminal offence equating to reports see table b . . in total there were therefore approximately unique reports excluding content re ported in duplicate . this is remarkable considering the fact that there were fewer reports of child pornography including content report in duplicate in in total see table b . of reports involve unique content constituting a criminal offence equating to reports see table b . . in total there were therefore approximately unique reports excluding content re ported in duplicate . this means that in there are approximately see table b . reports in duplicate. of reports involve unique content constituting a criminal offence equating to reports see table b . . in total there were therefore approximately unique reports excluding content reported in duplicate . this means that in there were approximately see table b . reports in duplicate. of reports involve unique content constituting a criminal offence equating to see table b . . this means that in there were approximately see table b . reports in duplicate. including questions. i.e. excluding content reported in duplicate. supplementary tables a supplement to . . . prosecutions in figures tables b . to b . provide a complete and detailed overview of the available data from the public prosecution service involving the child pornography cases registered with the public prosecution service and the child pornography cases concluded by the public prosecution service between and . please refer to appendix for the justification of the research methods employed and appendix for the explanatory notes to the tables displayed in this appendix and the statistics that are applicable to this. table b . number of cases suspects registered with the public prosecution service number of cases suspects registered with the public prosecution service n index figure percentage growth in relation to the previous year total . n a n a source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . cases registered in each district court public prosecutor s office total top n n n n n n n r alkmaar almelo amsterdam arnhem assen breda den bosch the hague dordrecht groningen haarlem leeuwarden maastricht middelburg roermond rotterdam in cases of child pornography were registered with the public prosecution service. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur total top n n n n n n n r utrecht zutphen zwolle total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . nature of the registered cases total n n n n n n n non aggra vated child pornography b para graph . aggravated child porno graphy b para graph b in conjunction with paragraph b in conjunction with paragraph b in conjunction with paragraph b in conjunction with paragraph sub total aggravated child porno graphy total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january in one instance it is unclear whether it was a case of non aggravated or aggravated child pornography because no paragraph number was recorded. the decision has been taken to categorise this case as non aggravated child pornography. in the case of article of the dutch criminal code it has been examined whether or not this article which brings with it an increased penalty has occurred in the same offence exclusively with article b paragraph and or paragraph of the dutch criminal code. supplementary tables table b . registered cases by gravest offence total n n n n n n n aggravated child por nography non aggravated child pornography . sexual offences com mitted upon minors other sexual offences removing a minor from the person who has custody human trafficking other offences total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january here aggravated child pornography consists exclusively of making a habit or profession of child por nography article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code whether or not in combination with paragraph . in two instances article paragraph in one instance and paragraph in the other both in is recorded as the gravest offence. however in view of the fact that this is recorded on a case level and therefore not on an offence level it is not possible to determine whether article appears within the same offence as child pornography. as such it is conceivable that the circumstances of article that attract a more severe penalty relate to a sexual offence other than child pornography. this may be a sexual offence committed upon a minor but may also be a sexual offence committed upon an adult. therefore these two cases have been categorised under other sexual offences. article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code. articles and of the dutch criminal code. articles may also apply to offences committed upon minors and of the dutch criminal code may also apply to offences committed upon minors and may also involve aggravated child pornography . article of the dutch criminal code. articles a a and f of the dutch criminal code. violent offences a total of times articles and of the dutch criminal code offences against property a total of times articles and of the dutch criminal code drug related offences a total of ten times articles from the opium act forgery of documents a total of four times articles and of the dutch criminal code arson a total of four times article of the dutch criminal code participation in a criminal organisation one time in total article of the dutch criminal code deprivation of liberty one time in total article a of the dutch criminal code. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table b . registered cases and preventive detention total n n n n n n n preventive detention no preventive detention . total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . number of cases concluded by the public prosecution service number of cases concluded by the public pros ecution service n index figure percentage growth in relation to the previous year total . n a. n a. source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . concluded cases by type of settlement total n n n n n n n summons . unconditional deci sion not to prosecute out of court settle ment conditional decision not to prosecute transfer abroad joinder total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january in child pornography cases were concluded. this may or may not relate to child pornography. supplementary tables b supplement to . . . cases concluded in first instance in figures tables b . to b . provide a complete and detailed overview of the available data from the public pros ecution service regarding the child pornography cases concluded in the first instance between and . please refer to appendix for the justification of the research methods employed and appendix for explanatory notes to the tables displayed in this appendix and the statistics that are applicable to this. table b . number of cases concluded in the first instance number of cases concluded in the first instance n index figure percentage growth in relation to the previous year total . n a. n a. source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . cases settled in the first instance by type of settlement total n n n n n n n conviction . full acquittal consolidated cases public prosecution service has no cause of action summons invalid discharge from further prosecution conviction without the imposition of any penalty or other order referral to other forum total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january in cases were concluded in the first instance. this may or may not relate to child pornography. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table b . convictions in the first instance by severity of charges total n n n n n n n aggravated child pornography non aggravated child pornography . sexual offences committed upon minors other sexual of fences removing a minor from the person who has custody trafficking in human beings other offences total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code whether or not in combination with paragraph . article b paragraph of the dutch criminal code. articles and of the dutch criminal code. articles and this may also apply to offences committed upon minors . article of the dutch criminal code. articles a a and f of the dutch criminal code. violent offences a total of ten times articles or of the dutch criminal code offences against property a total of nine times articles and of the dutch criminal code drug related offences a total of six times articles from the opium act forgery of documents a total of three times article of the dutch criminal code arson a total of two times article of the dutch criminal code deprivation of liberty one time in total article a of the dutch criminal code. the totals do not correspond exactly with the numbers of convictions in accordance with table b . . this difference can be explained by the fact that table b . is based on the cases in which article b of the dutch criminal code appears at the time that the case is registered with the public prosecution service and that this table is based on the cases in which article b of the dutch criminal code also actually appears on the charge. supplementary tables table b . convictions in the first instance according to sentence imposed total n n n n n n n non suspended custodial sentence community service order and fine non suspended custo dial sentence and com munity service order non suspended custodial sentence and fine non suspended cus todial sentence partially suspended custodial sentence community service order and fine partially suspended custodial sentence and community ser vice order partially suspended custodial sentence and fine partially suspended custodial sentence sub total non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentence suspended custodial sentence community service order and fine suspended custodial sentence and commu nity service order a non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentence is regarded as the most severe main sen tence. after that comes an entirely suspended custodial sentence followed by a community service order and ultimately a fine. in two cases this involves youth detention one one . in five cases this involves youth detention three one one . in five cases this involves youth detention one two . in eleven cases this involves youth detention four to inclusive one each three . child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur total n n n n n n n suspended custodial sentence and fine suspended custodial sentence sub total suspended cus todial sentence as the most severe main sentence community service order and fine community service order sub total community service order as the most severe main sentence fine unknown total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . orders and additional penalties imposed in the first instance total n n n n n n n orders with regard to adult offenders placement under a hospital order placement in a psychiatric institution institution for habitual offenders orders with regard to youth offenders placement under a hospital order placement in a young offenders institution orders with regard to victims compensation in seven cases this involves youth detention two to one each . the percentages are compared with the total number of cases that resulted in a conviction being made. supplementary tables total n n n n n n n other orders removal of items from circulation confiscation additional penalties forfeiture source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences handed down in the first instance according to term category total n n n n n n n months months months months years years years more than years total source data from the public prosecution service reference date january the totals do not correspond exactly with the numbers of non suspended or partially suspended cus todial sentences imposed in accordance with table b . a total of in relation to the total of in this table . this difference can be explained by the fact that in some instances the exact sentence imposed was not recorded even though it is known that a custodial sentence with a non suspended component of known duration was imposed. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table b . community service orders handed down in the first instance according to term category total n n n n n n n suspended com munity service order or unknown term hours hours more than hours total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . cases settled in the first instance in which an appeal was lodged appeal lodged total n n n n n n n none . by the public prosecutor by the suspect by both parties total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january c supplement to . . . cases settled on appeal in figures tables b . to b . provide a complete and detailed overview of the available data from the research and policy database for judicial documentation about the cases involving child pornography settled on appeal between and . please refer to appendix for the justification of the research methods employed and appendix for the tables displayed in this appendix and the statistics that are applicable to this. the totals do not correspond exactly with the numbers of non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences imposed in accordance with table b . a total of in relation to . this difference can be explained by the fact that in some instances the exact sentence imposed was not recorded even though it is known that a community service order of known duration was imposed. supplementary tables table b . number of cases settled on appeal number of cases settled on appeal n index figure percentage growth in relation to the previous year total n a. n a. source research and policy database for judicial documentation reference date january table b . cases settled on appeal according to settlement type total n n n n n n conviction full acquittal public prosecution service or suspect has no cause of action other unknown total source research and policy database for judicial documentation reference date january table b . convictions on appeal according to sentence imposed total n n n n n n non suspended custodi al sentence community service order and fine non suspended custo dial sentence and com munity service order in cases of child pornography were settled on appeal. in view of the backlog that the research and policy database for judicial documentation has it is ex pected that by a subsequent reference date notably the year a further increase will have occurred. whether or not for child pornography. including the verdict of guilty without imposing a sentence or order. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur total n n n n n n non suspended custo dial sentence and fine non suspended custo dial sentence partially suspended custodial sentence community service order and fine partially suspended custodial sentence and community service order partially suspended cus todial sentence and fine partially suspended custodial sentence sub total non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentence as the most severe main sentence suspended custodial sentence community service order and fine suspended custodial sentence and commu nity service order suspended custodial sentence and fine suspended custodial sentence sub total suspended cus todial sentence as the most severe main sentence community service order and fine community service order sub total community service order as the most severe main sentence fine total source research and policy database for judicial documentation reference date january supplementary tables table b . non suspended or partially suspended custodial sentences handed down on appeal according to term category total n n n n n n months months months months years years years more than years total source research and policy database for judicial documentation reference date january table b . community service orders handed down on appeal according to term category total n n n n n n hours hours more than hours unknown total source research and policy database for judicial documentation reference date january d supplement to . . . characteristics of suspects and persons convicted tables b . to b . provide a complete and detailed overview of the available data from the public prosecution service involving the suspects and persons convicted in the first instance between and . please refer to appendix for the justification of the research methods employed and appendix for the explanatory notes to the tables displayed in this appendix and the statistics that apply in that regard. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur table b . gender of suspects total n n n n n n n male . female n a legal entity unknown total . source research and policy database for judicial documentation reference date january table b . gender of persons convicted total n n n n n n n male . female unknown total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january table b . age of suspects total n n n n n n n years years years years years years n a legal entity unknown total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january the totals do not correspond exactly with the numbers of convictions according to b . . this differ ence can partly be explained by the fact that table b . is based both on convictions as well as guilty verdicts without sentences or measures being imposed. supplementary tables table b . age of persons convicted total n n n n n n n years years years years years years unknown total . source data from the public prosecution service reference date january supplement to . . probation and after care quantitative data table b . provides a complete and detailed overview of the available risc data that the dutch pro bation and after care services provided at the request of bnrm with regard to the child pornography clients registered with the probation and after care services in . please refer to appendix for the justification of the research methods employed and appendix for the tables displayed in this appendix and the statistics that are applicable to this. table b . selection of the risc scores of the child pornography clients in no. selected risc questions number of unique child pornography clients n . does it involve execution of the sentence non compliance with the terms and conditions of probation and or converting a suspended sanction into a non suspended sanction missing values . number of times convicted under juvenile criminal law up to years of times or more times missing value the totals do not correspond exactly with the numbers of convictions in accordance with b . . this difference can partly be explained by the fact that table b . is based both on convictions as well as guilty verdicts without sentences or measures being imposed. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur no. selected risc questions number of unique child pornography clients n . number of convictions after years of age of times or more times no missing values . the terms and conditions of probation were not complied with or the community service order imposed was not completed missing value . various offences and or a serious offence in their criminal history more minor offences no sexual offences at least serious offence i.e. sexual offence and or more than minor offences no missing values . other perpetrators were involved in the offence missing values . reason for committing the offence categories are not mutually exclusive sexual motivation financial motivation addiction satisfying needs emotional state discrimination or feelings of hatred thrill seeking power powerlessness group pressure other missing values . criminal behaviour was stimulated by categories are not mutually exclusive alcohol use pornography improper use of medication or failure to take medication psychiatric problems emotional state drugs recent trauma group pressure other missing values supplementary tables no. selected risc questions number of unique child pornography clients n . current living situation permanent accommodation temporary accommodation no permanent place of residence homeless missing values . work experience and employment history has always worked in principle has worked most of the time has never worked unclear employment history missing value . current work situation currently employed is looking for work or has work on an irregular basis is unemployed or not available for work missing values . experience of close partner relationships from early adulthood has had one or more close relationships has had positive and not so positive relationships stuck in destructive patterns missing values . current relationships with partner family and relatives mutual relationships relationships with some problems destructive relationships that are harmful to the parties involved missing values . has difficulty keeping going can handle troubles well feels under pressure feels overburdened missing values . psychological problems no psychological problems psychological problems that are unrelated to the offence longer term psychological problems missing values . self image normal self image wishes that certain aspects were different very negative self image or unrealistic self image missing values child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur no. selected risc questions number of unique child pornography clients n . social and interpersonal skills socially competent socially awkward socially incompetent missing values . impulsiveness thinks things through sometimes impulsive impulsive missing values . understanding of the problem acknowledges there are problems acknowledges there are some problems but does not recognise them consistently denies that there are any problems missing values . understanding of and attitude towards themselves and their criminal behaviour has an understanding of criminal behaviour has some understanding of criminal behaviour has no understanding of criminal behaviour missing values . inclination to change would like to change is somewhat willing to change is not motivated to change missing values source the dutch probation and after care services reference date may an overview of the descriptions in accordance with risc manual user version . from the risc questions selected by the bnrm of which the results were available is displayed below. supplementary tables scale criminal history . does it involve execution of the sentence non compliance with the terms and conditions of proba tion and or converting a suspended sanction into a non suspended sanction . number of times convicted under juvenile criminal law up to years score score score . number of convictions after years of age score score score . non compliance with terms and conditions of probation or non completion of the community service order that was imposed score no that did not happen score yes that did occur . various offences in criminal history and or a serious offence in criminal history number of different articles types of offences for which convictions have been made. scale a contains the serious offences whereas scale b contains the less serious offences. scale a takes precedence over scale b in judgments. in each case select the primary offence. score first conviction and or just one category is applicable score categories from scale b are applicable score one of the categories below from scale a is applicable and or at least different categories from b are applicable scale a scale b murder homicide attempted murder involuntary manslaughter or injury art. vandalism art. assault art. drug or alcohol related offence art. op op violent offence art. theft and or burglary art. sexual offence art. crimes against public authority or public order art. arson art. offence against property other than theft burglary art. abduction deprivation of liberty art. traffic offence art. a firearms offence art. w vw vw forgery of documents art. receiving stolen goods art. other offences art. j j uit wots child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur scale analysis of current offence and pattern of offending . other perpetrators involved in the offence yes no. number of others involved. influence of the group peers offender easily incited to act member of a gang . reason for committing the offence indications facts and sources of motivation and the reason for the offence. indicate which motives play a role. select points that you are able to substantiate on the basis of hard evidence indications of proof in the case file . a sexual motivation e.g. sexual offence sexual behaviour forensic evidence b financial motivation e.g. robbing burglary and handling stolen goods occupational offender c addiction satisfying needs e.g. offending in order to fund drug use gambling d emotional state of offender e.g. depression stress anxiety obsessive thoughts anger jealousy e discrimination or feelings of hatred towards certain groups e.g. ethnic groups minorities women religious groups f seeking sensations thrill seeking e.g. creating excitement alleviating boredom g power powerlessness h group pressure e.g. influence of a gang being provoked by the group etc. i other . criminal behaviour was further stimulated by a alcohol use b pornography c improper use of medication or failure to take medication d psychiatric problems e emotional state f drugs g recent trauma e.g. divorce unemployment h group pressure e.g. influence of a gang being provoked by the group etc. i other scale accommodation and living . current living situation detention or score permanent accommodation rented accommodation own home long term co habiting sheltered accommodation psychiatry hostel for homeless people help for the homeless accommodation provided by netherlands institute for psychological care and addiction care ggz or national association for organised primary care lvg score temporary accommodation short term resident night shelter bed bath bread score no permanent place of residence homeless no own permanent accommodation yet supplementary tables scale education work and learning . work experience and employment history score offender is in employment and does not leave one job without having their eye on another one. has never been sacked due to unsatisfactory performance. may have had some gaps in their employment history but those are gaps outside of their control e.g. due to reorganisation illness family responsibilities. has then made attempts to find work again. score offender has work most of the time. sometimes leaves one job with no prospect of another one. has been sacked but usually finds something else. score has never worked. has an unclear working history. often leaves a job for no reason or with no prospect of another one. has been sacked a number of times. has been sacked one or more times due to unsatisfactory performance not showing up for work or for other reasons attributable to themselves. . current work situation score works full time or part time employed on a permanent basis or through an employment agency whether or not in combination with other responsibilities family responsibilities following a probationary programme or education . follows a full time or part time education in combination with other responsibilities family responsibilities following a probationary programme etc. . score is looking for work or has work on an irregular basis. score unemployed or not able to work e.g. as a result of other problems physical or psychological . scale relationships with partner family and relatives . experience of close partner relationships from early adulthood score in the past the offender has had one or more close friendships or relationships with a partner. these were characterised by positive feelings equality and reciprocity. also score if the offender consciously decides to be single but appears capable of entering into a relationship. score the offender has a past involving positive as well as not so positive relationships. he she only has experience of short term close relationships and actually desires a long term relationship. he she has made an unfortunate choice of partner in the past seems to realise this and wants to do something about it. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur score offender is stuck in destructive patterns partner relationships up until now have been characterised by physical emotional or sexual abuse. the offender explains this themselves or admits this in discussion or the assessor establishes this. the offender has an unfortunate choice of partner e.g. a partner who mistreats or abuses them or who suffers from an addiction . in the most recent relationship that was described the offender was the party who mistreated or abused the other partner this may also include sexual abuse . most relationships are short term superficial and do not last very long. there is clear evidence that relationship problems are associated with the offence. or the offender is single and badly wants a relationship that also applies to offenders who are not capable of entering into a relationship . . current relationships with partner family and relatives score the current relationships are reciprocal mutually sustaining and show care for one another. the partners family members and relatives respect one another. the relation ships are strong and presumably serve a protective function in preventing recidivism. partner family members and or relatives will support the offender and help prevent recidivism. also score if the offender is single has little contact with their family but is satisfied with this and experiences the quality of contacts as good. score some problems are present within the current relationships with partner family and or relatives but there is a certain degree of respect and care for one another and everyone tries their hardest to make things work out as well as possible. also score if the offender is single and is not entirely happy about this and or does have some contact with their family and relatives but would like this to be improved. score the relationships with their partner family and or relatives are destructive and are harmful to one of the involved parties. the relationships and the offending behaviour are connected to one another. also score if the offender is single regards that as a major problem is willing to do a lot to change that and is unhappy because he she doesn t have a partner. supplementary tables scale emotional well being schaal patterns of thinking behaviour and skills . social and interpersonal skills capable of sizing up social situations and acting accordingly but this also includes the way in which the of fender interacts with other people. score in social terms offender acts in accordance with what is to be expected of him her with regard to age background life experience and education. is capable of judging social situations entering into relationships. offender is able to acknowledge and recognise the feelings of others e.g. victim . score offender is socially awkward. he she does not always assess social situations well and occasionally forgets to value the feelings of others e.g. victim . score in social terms offender is not able to stand on his her own two feet is socially incompetent. he she does not understand social situations well and does not act as expected in these situations. he she is not capable of imagining how another person e.g. victim feels. behaviour may vary from extremely shy and withdrawn to bordering on the aggressive maintains eye contact for too long continually interrupts the conversation dominant behaviour. . impulsiveness thinks first before acting. acting on the spur of the moment without thinking about the consequences for themselves or others. always seeking new experiences. score offender does not act impulsively but thinks things through. considers things before taking action. score offender acts impulsively in some situations and not in others. unable to concentrate on one thing for long before looking for something else. does have some insight into their own behaviour but does not have any real control over it. score offender acts impulsively in most situations. offender does not think about their actions not even afterwards. only pays attention to themselves and what they achieve with that action. only wants to do new and exciting things. has no insight whatsoever into cause effect relationships and their own role in this. . understanding of the problem being aware of problems and problem areas. also being aware of matters that contribute to the continued existence of the problem. score the offender acknowledges problems and is able to provide good examples of the part that they themselves play in these but also of matters that are important in contributing to the continued existence of the problem. child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur score the offender does acknowledge some problems but is not consistent in explaining them or in recognising the part that they play in the continued existence of the problem. the offender is able to effectively differentiate between main issues and side issues when reporting problems. score the offender denies the existence of problems that he she unable to deal with. at tributes problems to factors that are completely out of their own personal control. the offender indicates that the problems were caused by factors related to the past. he she has no perception of the possibility that the same problem could happen again in the future. scale attitude . understanding of and attitude towards themselves and their criminal behaviour how does the offender see the offence what are the causes and consequences and what were their motives score offender displays an understanding of the criminal behaviour understanding of their motivation to commit the offence and is able to lay down the cause effect relationships that led to the offence. the offender recognises their own role in this and wants to prevent offences in the future. score the offender has some understanding of the criminal behaviour and their motives. he she recognises the role that they played but also partly blames other factors. score the offender has no understanding of the criminal behaviour or of the motives. he she she does not lay down any cause effect relationships and has no self insight. he she may have either committed the offence consciously or it happened to them but they do not recognise their own role in this is not recognised. . inclination to change motivation to change and willingness to use opportunities to change. score offender really wants to change and use the opportunities that are available to him her. is realistic in their ideas about this. mainly internally motivated. score offender is somewhat willing to change. there are limited opportunities to change. above all the offender requires support and encouragement. is somewhat internally motivated but will mainly need external motivation. score offender is not motivated to change and or does not see a single opportunity to change does not want to change. if a change is to be achieved this will need to be instigated by external motivation. dit is een uitgave van ministerie van veiligheid en justitie postbus eh den haag www.rijksoverheid.nl venj maand publicatienr j postal address p.o. box eh the hague the netherlands t www.bnrm.nl may publicatienr j national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings child pornography first report of the dutch national rapporteur child pornography first report of the d utch n ational rapporteur table of contents overview of figures and tables abbreviations used foreword introduction current context scope covered by the reporting role perpetrators victims and technology creating the reporting body structure of the report the phenomenon of child pornography . introduction . developments over time . . introduction . . the period up to the mid s . . mid s to present . legal framework article b of the dutch criminal code . the nature of child pornography . . technology . . . the nature of the material . . . the activities production distribution and possession . . . functions of child abuse material for perpetrators . . perpetrators . . victims . the extent of child abuse material . . the number of perpetrators safety in numbers . . the number of victims . . the volume of child abuse material . conclusion the government agenda . introduction . policy developments since the early s . the significance of the lanzarote convention . security and justice . . security and justice the digital dimension . . domestic violence . health welfare and sport . . sexual health . . regional plan to tackle child abuse . education culture and science . social affairs and employment . economic affairs agriculture and innovation . conclusion implementation . introduction . prevention . . introduction . . prevention measures aimed at perpetrators . . prevention measures aimed at victims . . situational prevention . . public prevention measures . . conclusion . identification recording . . the identification of perpetrators . . . stop it now uk ireland . . . stichting m. report crime anonymously . . the identification of victims . . . the kindertelefoon service . . . helpwanted.nl . . . child abuse counselling and reporting centre . . the identification of content . . . the hotline combating child pornography on the internet . . . the cyber crime reporting website . . conclusion . detection . . introduction . . working method in detection . . complications . . the new structure . . conclusion . prosecution and trial . . prosecution . . trial . . sentences and orders . . prosecution and trial in figures . . . prosecution in figures . . . cases concluded in first instance in figures . . . cases settled on appeal in figures . . . characteristics of suspects and persons convicted . . trends . . conclusion . after care for and supervision of sex offenders . . introduction . . legal framework . . integrated approach after care for and supervision of offenders . . . starting points . . . phases in the integrated approach . . youth offenders . . probation and after care quantitative data . . conclusion . victim assistance . . introduction . . provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse . . provision of assistance to victims of sexual abuse within the context of child pornography . . provision of assistance to victims of the distribution possession and viewing of child abuse material . . the amsterdam sexual abuse case . . conclusion . public private sector partnerships in the netherlands in the matter of child pornography . . introduction . . interplay of forces in public private sector partnerships . . concrete actions of public private sector partnerships . . . private sector . . . intermediate level social organisations . . direction of public private sector partnerships in the netherlands . . conclusion conclusions and recommendations . core message . where do matters stand at present . . child pornography as a complex phenomenon . . the government agenda . . implementation . . . general . . . prevention . . . identification and registration . . . detection . . . prosecution and trial . . . after care and supervision . . . victim assistance . . . public private sector partnerships . connections . specification and recommendations bibliography appendix a copine scale a justification of research methods used the amk study the public prosecution service data and investigation research and policy database for judicial documentation study the probation study a explanatory notes to tables figures and statistics explanatory notes to tables explanatory notes to figures explanatory notes to statistics a supplementary tables supplement to . . . the hotline combating child pornography on the internet a supplement to . . . prosecutions in figures b supplement to . . . cases concluded in first instance in figures c supplement to . . . cases settled on appeal in figures d supplement to . . . characteristics of suspects and persons convicted supplement to . . probation and after care quantitative data 