 microsoft word nrm jvds fifth report rapporteur def.doc trafficking in human beings fifth report of the dutch national rapporteur c.e. dettmeijer vermeulen dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings m. boot matthijssen e.m.h. van dijk h. de jonge van ellemeet d.a.c. koster m. smit iii contents overview of tables ix abbreviations used xi foreword xix introduction . introduction . the national action plan on combating human trafficking . prevention . dealing with the demand side . collecting information on human trafficking . this report legislation and regulations . introduction . national legislation and regulations . . the new thb provision . . amendments to the b regulation . . aliens employment act . . other imminent legislation and regulations . international . . introduction . . united nations . . european union . . council of europe . . organisation for security and co operation in europe osce . points of attention and bottlenecks victims and victim support . introduction . victims . . some specific risk groups trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur iv . . victims in numbers . facilities available to victims . . general developments and facilities . . specific assistance bodies and initiatives . dealing with juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem . . local initiatives . . national institutions projects and initiatives . points of attention and bottlenecks administrative enforcement in the prostitution sector . introduction . developments in the sex industry . administrative enforcement . . preventive enforcement . . supervision . . repressive enforcement . . amendment of legislation and regulations . points of attention and bottlenecks investigation . introduction . national developments including policy developments and initiatives . . police . . royal netherlands marechaussee . . special investigation services and inspection services . identifying possible thb situations . investigation of thb . investigations the data bnrm police study . . investigations into thb . . victims . international developments . points of attention and bottlenecks contents v financial investigations . introduction . financial investigations illegally obtained profits and confiscation . . what is financial investigation . . what are illegally obtained profits . . what is confiscation . national policy developments in the area of financial investigations and confiscation . . developments in the area of financial investigations . . developments in the area of confiscation . results of bnrm police study financial investigations . . financial detection methods . . collaboration and information exchange . . dilemmas in financial investigation . results of bnrm police study illegally obtained profits . . extent of illegally obtained profits . . prejudgment seizure . . siphoning and money laundering . results of bnrm police study confiscation . . confiscation in thb cases completed in . . confiscation in thb cases completed in . results of bnrm police study compensation to victims . points of attention and bottlenecks the public prosecution service and prosecution . introduction . policy developments . . policy oriented and organisational embedding of the approach . . practical points of departure . research results . . cases of thb registered with the public prosecution service . . the suspects . . cases dealt with by the public prosecution service . . settlement by the court . . appeal . international developments . . international collaboration trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur vi . . eurojust . points of attention and bottlenecks exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry . introduction . bnrm study into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry . . definition of terms . . the reasons for the bnrm study . . response . exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry in the sense of thb . . legal perspective . . indicators of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry . . labour and services . case descriptions . . preliminary remarks . . qualifying criterion for the cases . . categorisation of the cases . risk sectors . . introduction . . relevant sectors . . discussion of the sectors in question . groups at risk . . introduction . . characteristics of potential victims . . characteristics of potential perpetrators . points of attention and bottlenecks when dealing with exploitation outside the sex industry . . introduction . . points of attention and bottlenecks trafficking in human beings for the purpose of organ removal . introduction . state of affairs and developments . . organ donation and trade in organs . . thb with a view to organ removal . exploratory research among medical practitioners . points of attention and bottlenecks contents vii recommendations summary . introduction . legislation and regulations . . human trafficking in the dutch criminal code . . b regulation . . other primary and subordinate legislation . . international developments . administrative enforcement in the sex industry . . developments in the sex industry . . preventive enforcement . . administrative supervision . . repressive administrative enforcement . . a more sharply focussed statutory framework . victims . . specific risk groups . . victims in numbers . assistance . . system oriented operation . . victim reception . . dealing with juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem . . some assistance organisations . investigation and prosecution . . policy developments in investigation and prosecution . . indications of human trafficking . . investigation . . financial investigations . . prosecution . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry . . definition of terms . . the criterion for exploitation used . . risk sectors . . characteristics and risk groups . . dealing with exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry . human trafficking with a view to organ removal . . organ donation . . trade in organs trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur viii . . human trafficking with a view to organ removal . . interviews among medical practitioners . conclusion recommendations bibliography appendix thb provision in the dutch criminal code appendix justification of research methods used the b research the bnrm police study the bnrm research into financial investigations the public prosecution service data investigation the bnrm research into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry appendix explanation of tables and statistics appendix supplementary tables ix overview of tables table . major countries of origin of victims showing annual rankings table . most important countries of origin of possible victims registered with the stv per annum table . age distribution of victims reported to the stv per annum table . age distribution of persons with a b permit application table . nationality of persons with a b permit application table . region of origin of persons with a b permit application table . investigations into thb completed each year according to thb type table . reports and witness statements made by victims in thb investigations sent to the pps per annum and type of thb table . underage victims in thb investigations sent to the pps per annum and type of thb table . illegally obtained profits per year table . number of cases registered and cases also involving underage victims per annum table . type of thb for each year of registration table . most serious offences per year of registration table . country of birth of suspects per year of registration table . ranking of the most prevalent countries of birth of suspects per year of registration table . pre trial detention per year of registration table . cases dealt with by the pps per year in which the cases were dealt with table . settlement in the first instance per year of settlement table . settlement for most serious crime per year of settlement table . sentence imposed for most serious crime per year of settlement table . appeal lodged per year of settlement at the first instance table . response rate per category to bnrm questionnaires table . key figures contacted directly table . classification of cases table . number of cases with indications of exploitation per sector trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur x table . number of cases regarding situations involving exploitation per sector table b . nationality of possible victims registered with the stv per annum table b . nationality of persons with a b permit application table b . countries of birth of suspects per year of registration xi abbreviations used aect alliance expert coordination team ag advocaat generaal advocate general ai arbeidsinspectie health and safety inspectorate aid algemene inspectiedienst general inspectorate service aiv adviesraad internationale vraagstukken advisory council on international affairs ama alleenstaande minderjarige asielzoeker unacompanied underage asylum seeker amf teams arbeidsmarktfraude teams labour market fraud teams amk advies en meldpunt kindermishandeling child abuse advisory and reporting centre amv alleenstaande minderjarige vreemdeling unaccompanied underage foreign national anwb algemeen nederlandse wielrijders bond dutch automobile association apv algemene plaatselijke verordening general municipal ordinance arbo arbeidsomstandigheden working conditions asc american society of criminology atau anti trafficking assistance unit bd belastingsdienst tax administration bfo bureau financi le ondersteuning financial support bureau bfr bureau financi le recherche financial investigations bureau blinn bonded labour in the netherlands bnrm bureau nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel office of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings bod bijzondere opsporingsdienst special investigation service boom bureau ontnemingswetgeving openbaar ministerie public prosecution service criminal assets confiscation bureau br bovenregionale recherche supra regional crime squad trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur xii buza ministerie van buitenlandse zaken ministry of foreign affairs bw burgerlijk wetboek dutch civil code bzk ministerie van binnenlandse zaken en koninkrijksrelaties ministry of the interior and kingdom relations cahteh committee on action against trafficking in human beings cao collectieve arbeidsovereenkomst collective labour agreement carin camden asset recovery inter agency network cba criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse crime projection analysis cbs centraal bureau voor de statistiek statistics netherlands cc dutch criminal code cdpc european committee on crime problems cedaw convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women cgkr centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding centre for equal opportunities and opposition to racism cie criminele inlichtingen eenheid criminal intelligence unit ciroc centre for information and research on organised crime cjib centraal justitieel incasso bureau central judicial collection agency cnv christelijk nationaal vakverbond christian national union coa centraal orgaan opvang asielzoekers central agency for the reception of asylum seekers ctoc convention against transnational organised crime dci defence for children international dinpol dienst internationale politiesamenwerking international police cooperation service dnp de nederlandse politie the dutch police dnri dienst nationale recherche informatie national crime intelligence service ec europese commissie european commission ecd economische controledienst economic audit service ecpat end child prostitution child pornography and the trafficking of children for sexual purposes eg europese gemeenschap european community ehrm europees hof voor de rechten van de mens european court of human rights abbreviations used xiii ek eerste kamer upper house of the dutch parliament emm expertisecentrum mensenhandel en mensensmokkel expertise centre on thb and people smuggling ep europees parlement european parliament er europese raad european council eu europese unie european union eurojust europees orgaan voor de justiti le samenwerking european union judicial cooperation unit europol europese politie european police office evrm europees verdrag tot bescherming van de rechten van de mens european convention on the protection of human rights fiod fiscale inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst fiscal information and investigation service fiod ecd fiscale inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst economische controledienst fiscal information investigation service economic audit service fiu nl financial intelligence unit fnv federatie van nederlandse vakbewegingen dutch trade union federation fo federatie opvang federation of reception shelters fp functioneel parket national public prosecutor s office for economic and environmental offences ga general assembly gaatw global alliance against trafficking in women gba gemeentelijke basisadministratie persoonsgegevens municipal personal records database gao government accountability office united states ggd gemeentelijke gezondheidsdienst municipal health service gg gd gemeentelijke geneeskundige en gezondheidsdiensten municipal medical and health services ggz geestelijke gezondheidszorg nederland netherlands institute for psychological care goc grensoverschrijdende criminaliteitsteam cross border crime squad hon handhaven op niveau quality enforcement project hr hoge raad dutch supreme court trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur xiv hvo querido hulp voor onbehuisden querido querido help for the homeless icmpd international centre for migration policy development igo informatie gestuurde opsporing information led investigation ikp s informatie knooppunt politie systeem police information node system ilo international labour organisation ind immigratie en naturalisatiedienst immigration and naturalisation service ioov inspectie openbare orde en veiligheid public order and security inspectorate iom international organisation for migration irc internationale rechtshulp centra international legal assistance centres jbz raad raad van ministers van justitie en binnenlandse zaken council of ministers of justice and the interior jit joint investigation team jji justiti le jeugdinrichtingen judicial institutions for juvenile persons jos project juridische opvang slachtoffers seksueel geweld legal assistance for victims of sexual violence klpd korps landelijke politie diensten national police services agency kmar koninklijke marechaussee royal netherlands marechaussee lem landelijke expertgroep mensenhandel national expert group on trafficking in human beings ljn landelijk jurisprudentie nummer national case law number logo landelijk overleg gemeentebesturen opvang en terugkeerbeleid national consultative body for municipal administrations on reception and returns policy los landelijke ongedocumenteerden stichting national foundation for undocumented migrants lovj mensenhandel landelijk officier mensensmokkel en mensenhandel national public prosecutor for thb and people smuggling lp landelijk parket national office of the public prosecution service m. stichting meld misdaad anoniem report crime anonymously crimestoppers mob met onbekende bestemming destination unknown mot meldpunt ongebruikelijke transacties centre for reporting unusual transactions moe landen midden en oost europese landen central and eastern european countries abbreviations used xv mvt memorie van toelichting explanatory memorandum nam nationaal actieplan mensenhandel national action plan on combating thb ncips nederlands centrum voor internationale politiesamenwerking netherlands centre for international police cooperation ngo niet gouvernementele organisatie non governmental organisation nigz nationaal instituut voor gezondheidsbevordering en ziektepreventie national institute for health promotion and disease prevention njcm nederlands juristen comit voor de mensenrechten dutch section of the international commission of jurists nebedeagpol nederland belgi deutschland arbeitsgesellschaft polizei netherlands belgium and germany police union npi nederlands politie instituut netherlands police institute nr nationale recherche national crime squad nri nationale recherche informatie national crime intelligence service nrm nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings nrm eerste rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel first nrm report nrm derde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel third nrm report nrm vierde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel fourth nrm report octa organised crime threat assessment okia ondersteuningskomitee illegale arbeiders support committee for illegal workers om openbaar ministerie public prosecution service oom operationeel overleg mensenhandel operational consultation group on trafficking in human beings or ondernemingsraad works council osce organization for security and cooperation in europe osr osce special representative ovj officier van justitie public prosecutor ovse organisatie voor veiligheid en samenwerking in europa organisation for security and cooperation in europe pa parliamentary assembly pag parket generaal national public prosecutor s office trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur xvi pbeg publicatieblad van de europese gemeenschapen official journal of the european community pc es committee of experts on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and abuse pg procureur generaal procurator general plexa project be indiging leefgelden van ex ama s project on the termination of allowances for former unaccompanied underage asylum seekers ppm dnp project prostitutie mensenhandel de nederlandse politie national police project on prostitution and trafficking in human beings pps public prosecution service pmw prostitutie maatschappelijk werk prostitution social work rean return and emigration of aliens from the netherlands riagg regionale instellingen voor ambulante geestelijke gezondheidszorg regional institute for community mental healthcare rri randstad return initiative rve raad van europa council of europe rvdk raad voor de kinderbescherming child protection board samah stichting alleenstaande minderjarige asielzoekers humanitas foundation for unaccompanied minor asylum seekers humanitas sgbo onderzoeks en adviesbureau van de vereniging van nederlandse gemeenten research and advice bureau of the association of dutch municipalities siba statistische informatievoorziening en beleidsanalyse statistical data and policy analysis unit siod sociale inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst social information and investigation service sk scharlaken koord the scarlet cord sr strafrecht criminal law stb staatsblad state bulletin of acts and decrees srtv stichting religieuzen tegen vrouwenhandel dutch foundation of the religious against trafficking in women stcrt staatscourant government gazette abbreviations used xvii stv stichting tegen vrouwenhandel dutch foundation against trafficking in women sv strafvordering criminal procedure szw ministerie van sociale zaken en werkgelegenheid social affairs and employment ta tax authority tip rapport trafficking in persons report thb trafficking in human beings tk tweede kamer lower house of the dutch parliament tnv tijdelijke noodvoorziening vreemdelingen temporary aliens emergency facilities trb tractatenblad treaty series un united nations unhcr united nations high commissioner for refugees unicef united nations children s fund unodc united nations office on drugs and crime unts united nations treaty series uk united kingdom uwv uitvoering werknemersverzekeringen social security agency vb vreemdelingenbesluit aliens decree vc vreemdelingencirculaire aliens act implementation guidelines v i vreemdelingenzaken en integratie immigration and integration vn verenigde naties united nations vng vereniging nederlandse gemeenten association of netherlands municipalities vrom ministerie van volkshuisvesting ruimtelijke ordening en milieubeheer ministry of housing spatial planning and environmental management vrom iod inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst van het ministerie van vrom information and investigation service of the ministry of vrom vws volksgezondheid welzijn en sport public health welfare and sport waadi wet allocatie arbeidskrachten door intermediairs act on allocation of manpower by intermediaries wav wet arbeid vreemdelingen aliens employment act wet bibob wet bevordering integriteitsbeoordeling door het openbaar bestuur public administration probity screening act trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur xviii wodc wetenschappelijk onderzoek en documentatiecentrum scientific research and documentation centre wod wet op de orgaandonatie organ donation act wsg wet schadefonds geweldsmisdrijven violent offences compensation fund act wvs wet voorkoming schijnhuwelijken marriages of convenience prevention act wvsr wetboek van strafrecht dutch criminal code wvsv wetboek van strafvordering dutch code of criminal procedure zm zittende magistratuur judiciary xix foreword on june i presented the fifth report of the national rapporteur to the dutch gov ernment. this is a slightly modified and abridged version of the report. in this report you will find that apart from the usual topics attention has been especially devoted to the three following subjects financial investigations human trafficking with a view to organ removal and labour exploitation outside the sex industry. labour exploitation outside the sex industry has become a criminal offence in the nether lands as of january . the legislation does not provide a clear dividing line between bad employment and slavery like situations. it is entrusted to the judiciary to further define the concept of labour exploitation. an important leading decision in this area is the judgment of the european court of human rights of july in the case of siliadin v france. i hope that the descriptions of cases in chapter of my report will also form a source of reference. recently three judgments at first instance have been rendered in the netherlands. these cases involved the harvesting of hemp plants a chinese restaurant and cleaning. all three cases resulted in an acquittal on human trafficking charges with convictions for offences re lated to human trafficking. two of these are still under appeal. clearly the definition of la bour exploitation outside the sex industry requires further research. i intend to keep a close watch on the development of case law in this area. the position of the victim remains a matter of continuing concern. some improvements have been made in the sphere of residency status however many improvements related to the victim s position in the framework of criminal law and procedure still need to be under taken. it remains for example perpetually difficult for victims to obtain redress and compen sation for tangible and intangible losses. i propose to undertake further research into the vic tim s position particularly regarding criminal law and procedure and compensation. the topic of human trafficking is high on the agenda in the netherlands and people are working hard to put policy into practice. but it is not yet sufficient. during a recent major police investigation many victims of human trafficking were identified in the licensed pros titution industry. more than six years after lifting the general ban on brothels it appears that not enough measures have as yet been taken or perhaps not enforced adequately enough to free the sex industry from forced prostitution. this has prompted me into recommending the development of a stronger national legislative framework for prostitution policy. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur xx this shows that there is still quite enough work to be done. while it is obviously important to keep human trafficking high on the various agendas this will only have a real impact if policy is put even more into practice. i hope that my recom mendations will assist in these objectives. my report covers the situation in he netherlands and my recommendations are aimed at the dutch government. human trafficking is however a world wide problem frequently in volving cross border organised crime and flagrant breaches of human rights of those indi viduals who are merely looking for a better life. there must be and must continue to be international attention to the macro factors which constitute the source and breeding ground for cross border human trafficking. the research for the fifth report was set up and initiated before i took office. i therefore owe a large measure of thanks to my predecessor and the founder of the bnrm a.g. korvinus. various individuals have contributed to this report. many co operating organisations in cluding the police stv and the ind have provided information and bnrm owes them a debt of gratitude. a special word of thanks is due to peter paul groen of the statistical in formation supply policy analysis department siba at wodc who again undertook the analysis of the data provided from the public prosecution service for this fifth report on trafficking in human beings. c.e. dettmeijer vermeulen national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings introduction . introduction an important recent development was the entering into force of the new human trafficking article f in the dutch criminal code. this legislative amendment brought new activities in addition to those matters rendered criminal in the former article a of the criminal code within the scope of criminal provision on trafficking in human beings thb includ ing exploitation in employment or services in sectors other than the sex industry and certain activities aimed at organ removal. this expansion has implications for many of the organisa tions that have joined the fight against thb they must now also become involved in detect ing and or prosecuting these new forms of thb and identifying and assisting the victims in question. furthermore as a result of this expansion there are some new chain partners in volved in these endeavours. in this context it is beneficial that there is an increasingly clear effort to collaborate among all of the partners in the chain. this multi agency approach is frequently described in the netherlands as a systematic approach . a great deal of signifi cance is attached to this by the police the public prosecution service pps and the social as sistance services. one consequence of the legislative changes is an expansion of operational scope for bnrm the reports and recommendations have to cover a broader range of topics. this is partly why bnrm has come to devote more resources to studying specific themes instead of annually collecting quantitative data applying the same method though this is also due to the fact that in the field of human trafficking and how it is combated new developments are continually occurring and new questions are arising which demand and justify topical research. in concrete terms this means that the present report devotes less attention to detection and investigation of thb in a general sense focusing rather on three specific topics namely fi nancial investigations exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and human traf ficking with the intention of removing organs. . the national action plan on combating human trafficking the national action plan on combating human trafficking nationaal actieplan mensenhandel nam was submitted by the cabinet to the lower house on december . the plan which also formed the cabinet s reaction to the recommendations in the third report of the national rapporteur was presented as a dynamic document. on feb ruary the minister of justice submitted the additional measures to the action plan to the lower house. these measures related primarily to victims who are minors and to child prostitution but in addition covered the topics of prevention reporting and registration as trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur well as investigation and prosecution also for exploitation in other sectors than in the sex industry. in a response to the nam bnrm welcomed the fact that an action plan had been prepared. much has happened since the third report and the nam. there are also however issues on which no significant progress has yet been made. three comments on the nam have not yet lost anything of their topicality the provision of reception and assistance in certain cases to victims who are unwill ing to cooperate in police investigations and prosecution or who dare not do so is primarily viewed from the perspective of asking what the benefit is for the police and justice systems rather than as it should be from the perspective of the victim adequate protection of victims should also but not exclusively be considered in the context of their return to their countries of origin national overviews of the results of administrative checks and interventions in the prostitution industry insofar as relevant in relation to thb are useful for criminal law enforcement in the context of combating thb. these overviews should be pre pared on an ongoing basis and not just at a single point in time in the context of monitoring the abolition of the general ban on brothels. in relation to these sorts of issues improved direction for instance from a multidisciplinary human trafficking task force might very well play a stimulating and facilitating role. . prevention prevention is better than cure. the same applies to human trafficking. prevention is there fore an important topic yet there is no separate chapter devoted to it in this report. this is not because nothing is being done about prevention in the netherlands. in fact a lot is being done including the production of information films such as the film anna commissioned by the dutch foundation of the religious against trafficking in women explanation of the dangers of loverboys at schools and elsewhere the explanation that is to be provided by the ministry of social affairs and employ ment to employers and by means of leaflets to migrant workers covering the statu tory minimum provisions on employment conditions a range of actions aimed at identifying potential victims within risk groups as early as possible the covenant between the ministry of justice and the dutch daily press which in cludes the stipulation that daily newspapers request those who place erotic adver tisements to state a licence or vat number in the adverts. this will make it clear to prevention is also a significant element in the nam. introduction customers whether or not they are dealing with a licensed business reducing the chance that a victim of human trafficking will be encountered in this way. one of the aims is to increase awareness on the demand side attention currently being paid in training and education of defence staff to matters such as the protection of women and girls against sexual violence prostitution abuse and indecent assault as well as human trafficking taskforce women safety and conflict vrouwen veiligheid en conflict final report the financing of various projects by the netherlands via dutch embassies aimed at combating human trafficking and supporting victims. because preventive activities are so wide ranging in nature and because so many interven tions also incorporate a preventive element thus for example investigation and prosecu tion can have a preventive effect they will be dealt with in the various chapters. little is known about the effectiveness of interventions and this applies to preventive as well as the more curative measures so far there has been little by way of impact evaluation. . dealing with the demand side the demand for cheap labour is regarded as an important root cause of thb. rightly therefore a good deal of attention is paid to addressing the demand side which can also be regarded as a form of primary prevention. international documents such as the palermo protocol the brussels declaration the convention of the council of europe the eu action plan the ocse action plan a resolution by the european parliament and a resolution by the parliamentary assembly of the council of europe all urge states to address the de mand side of human trafficking. discussions on addressing demand however are often confined to addressing the demand for sexual services see for example the report by hughes on best practices to address the demand side of trafficking and are often of an ideological nature. o connell davidson points out that abolitionist feminist groups have lobbied for a very specific approach to the demand side namely countering demand for sexual services in general by criminalising the clients. this is also the conclusion of the report by the un special rapporteur on trafficking from february which in fact invoked several critical responses to the effect that the report had not come about in an ob jective or sound manner. the covenant also sets out that clients will be informed in between the adverts that they are likely to be less at risk dealing with a licensed company. this is also evident from the summary of best and promising practices from the united nations national governments and non governmental organisations in the field of prevention prepared on the instructions of the canadian national crime prevention centre gervais . these institutions and documents are discussed in more detail in chapter . integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective report of the special rapporteur on trafficking in human beings especially women and children e cn. dated february . thus in a response in august la strada international pointed out that the rapporteur had based her views to a significant extent on opinions rather than facts and wrongly reported that the palermo protocol indicates trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur there are however various options in relation to dealing with the demand for thb for the purpose of exploitation in the sex industry. the choice made by a country depends partly on the culture of that country and how prostitution is regarded there. the swedish govern ment for example which regards all prostitution as constituting violence against women made the purchase of sexual services a criminal offence. in the netherlands where a distinc tion is drawn between commercial sex by consenting adults and forced prostitution at tempts are made to influence the demand side in other ways such as via the campaign ap pearances are deceptive schijn bedriegt which is aimed at making clients more conscious of their responsibilities. there is debate in the netherlands about criminalising the conscious purchase of sexual ser vices from individuals who are clearly acting under coercion. in a recommendation in the third report bnrm pressed for discussion on this point in which not only the desirability but also the practical feasibility of any such criminalisation would be considered. some of the chain partners read this recommendation wrongly as a plea for criminalisation. it did seem and still seems of importance to bnrm partly in light of international pressure to undertake a thorough consideration and a proper debate of a decision for or against. the recommendation found its way into the nam. in its response to the nam the dutch foundation against trafficking in women stichting tegen vrouwenhandel stv asked for consideration of the undesirable side effects of any such measure. it is likely that human traffickers prostitutes and clients will withdraw further into the invisible and often illegal circuit in order to avoid arrest. this means that victims will be removed from the purview of police field workers and health care services with all the risks this entails and will be de prived of assistance and protection. human traffickers will become more difficult to detect which will hamper the chances of arrests and a repressive approach. clients will be less in clined to report any signs of human trafficking and victimisation if they run the risk of being punished according to the stv. the discussion has not yet been completed. there is however not only a demand for cheap sexual services but also for cheap labour in for example construction agriculture and private households and there is also a demand for human organs. the demand side thus is a multi faceted concept and discussions con cerning the demand side and measures to discourage it must not be limited to addressing the demand for sexual services see also the statement of the alliance expert coordination team concerning the demand side . the ilo argues for the criminalisation of ex that all prostitution implies thb. the global alliance against trafficking in women gaatw concluded in its reaction to the report while fully acknowledging that the special rapporteur is an independent expert she is at the same time bound by certain principles which govern her mandate these include strict impartiality and objectivity . these principles in our view have not been fully respected in this particular exercise. this neglect raises questions about the utility of the report. the purchase of sexual services from a minor between the ages of and is already a criminal offence art. b dutch criminal code as is attending a sex show involving the performance of a minor art. c dutch criminal code . sex with minors below the age of is also a criminal offence art. and dutch criminal code . in which the following are represented in addition to la strada osce various un divisions iom icmpd introduction ploitation but also for reducing the risk of exploitation through migration and labour mar ket policies. in the additional measures to the nam the ministry of justice together with the ministry of social affairs and employment expressed the intention to formulate in initiatives designed to reduce the demand that results or can result in labour exploi tation and to collaborate with employers associations and trade unions in this effort. one initiative taken is the flanking policy designed to restrict any possibly detrimental conse quences of the free movement of employees from the eu member states in central and eastern europe. . collecting information on human trafficking it is widely recognised that knowledge about thb is of major importance for addressing the phenomenon in an adequate manner. we need to know more about human traffickers and how they work but also about victims how do they cope when they are being victimised and in the period following this if they are brave enough to tell their story to what extent are they offered the necessary assistance and support and which interventions in the battle against human trafficking and in relation to victim support are effective at the same time it is clear that is very difficult to collect reliable information. there are various reasons for this exploitation partly occurs in hidden sectors such as the unlicensed sex industry the informal economy and behind closed doors in private households making it difficult to detect victims including victims of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry are reluctant to tell of their experiences for these reasons and also because exploitation does not generally speaking cause any visible disturbance of public order cases remain undiscovered. it is unknown how large this dark number is. another significant question is what type of research is needed. it is often said that studies in relation to a single country provide too limited a picture. this is true in relation to specific aspects of what is frequently a cross border offence such as human trafficking routes or ob taining a picture of the situation for victims who have returned to their countries of origin. however for national policy purposes it is valuable and even essential to collect informa tion specific to a particular country. this type of information is also indispensable for clari fying the meaning of the results from large scale international comparative studies. all the more so because this type of studies generally speaking and quite apart from human traf ficking already has to deal with additional problems. europol interpol nexus institute acta anti slavery international ecpat terre des hommes save the children amnesty international and bnrm. there is further discussion of the aect in chapter . dated october during the special day on trafficking at the human dimension implementation meeting of the osce . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur an additional problem is that there is no unanimous international definition of thb. while the definition of human trafficking in the un palermo protocol on thb is applied broadly see for example gallagher there still are differences between different countries in the way they interpret this definition and in how thb is defined in national legislation. this in turn has consequences for any data that may potentially be available. in some coun tries the data only covers cross border human trafficking whereas others also include in ternal domestic trafficking. in some countries the law and the data cover exploitation not only in the sex industry but also in other sectors while in other countries this is not yet the case. also the extent to which combating thb is prioritised in a particular country will in fluence the availability and amount of data on the phenomenon. the united states gov ernment accountability office gao discusses this type of problems at length and states that country specific information on thb is not available not reliable or not comparable gao . the question arises as to whether studies into thb on a large scale occasionally even on the global scale take adequate account of the distinctions mentioned above. do they reflect a balanced picture of reality or do they simply reflect figures without paying much attention to the context from which these are drawn it seems that the fact that some countries such as the netherlands collect and publish information on thb and trafficking victims has a negative influence on the image of these countries portrayed in large scale reports. unodc global report the netherlands in the top destinations for victims of human trafficking is apparently one of the results of a worldwide investigation by the united nations office on drugs and crime unodc . the netherlands is indeed a destination country for victims of thb which has to be countered in every way possible but there is a question as to whether the problem is so much greater in the neth erlands than in many other western and non western countries. there is not in fact any allegation to this effect in the unodc report. the overviews in the unodc report are based on the number of times a particular country is men tioned as a country of origin transit or destination for victims in a range of sources. this means that the part played by a country in the report is determined to a significant extent by the amount of atten tion paid to thb in that particular country see also gao . the dutch approach to combating human trafficking is certainly susceptible to improvement but at least attention is paid to the problem. this along with the fact that in the netherlands information is registered concerning victims suspects the un protocol allows such scope for countries see also otten munro . gao makes recommendations for increasing the credibility of the global trafficking in persons tip reports produced each year by the american government. the most important of these recommendations is that the rationale behind the allocation to tiers categories indicating whether or not a government is doing enough to combat human trafficking must be clear. and there are not many countries that do so. vermeulen et al. conclude on the basis of a state of the art research of the then member states of the eu that only belgium and the netherlands in the whole of europe have proper data sets in relation to thb. the authors propose the development of a gigantic interna tional database for the collection and analysis of data concerning missing and sexually exploited children as well as thb and have produced a blueprint for this with variables concerning the victim the event and the perpe trator. introduction and their prosecution and the fact that there is a national rapporteur whose reports are referred to in many international publications on thb adds up quickly in overviews such as those of unodc. many countries voiced fierce criticism of a draft version of the report at the end of . apart from the points mentioned above bnrm also pointed out the geographical bias it is for example highly incredible that not a single african country is classified as very high among destination countries as well as problems of methodology such as the absence of information concerning the validity and reli ability of the base material. unodc asked a panel of independent experts to evaluate the research methods and results. the panel had comparable objections. the most significant conclusion was that the unodc report ana lysed the level of reporting and not the incidence of thb itself. unodc took the remarks of the panel to heart adopted most of the recommendations from the evaluation adjusted the terminology to some extent and set out the limitations of the research in the report. unfortunately but as might have been expected this nuance was missed by the press and is often overlooked when the report is used. there is a great need for numbers and a better understanding of them. it should be clear from what has already been said that it is difficult to obtain reliable figures on thb if only because of the nature of the phenomenon. researchers in the area of thb therefore have to wrestle with the question whether it is possible to estimate the size of for example popula tions of the victims of thb. the results have not hitherto been encouraging. in the united states the gao for example confirms that the us government which publishes the global trafficking in persons tip report each year has still not developed any effective mecha nism for assessing numbers of victims gao . the study by sikkel et al. into methods for assessing the size of hidden populations in the netherlands particularly un documented migrants does not give much cause for hope either. this is regrettable but we should also appreciate that although knowing the numbers might say something about the scale of the measures needed to be able to deal with thb this would not clarify what has to be done. for this we also need more in the way of qualitative information. in this respect it is regrettable that while many countries are showing interest in the phenomenon of the nrm and international bodies are urging the appointment of rapporteurs very few na tional rapporteurs have yet been appointed. not much has changed on this point since the third report. report of meeting of experts on unodc report on trafficking in human beings vienna january . thus the general assembly of united nations recommended the appointment of national rapporteurs in resolution a res dated february as did the european commission ec in the communi cation fighting trafficking in human beings an integrated approach and proposals for an action plan notice com dated october and the european parliament in the resolution strategies to prevent the trafficking of women and children who are vulnerable to sexual exploitation a dated december . a uk country report by anti slavery international states that an independent national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings should be established in the uk along the lines of the role of the dutch national rapporteur anti slavery international . it can be stated however that romania is working on the establishment of a national agency against trafficking in persons which will also have reporting duties. an increasing number of countries has a taskforce national coordinator and or national action plan on thb. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur working methods of bnrm bnrm collects both quantitative and qualitative information. this is done using among other meth ods in house research secondary analysis of existing data files the organisation of meetings attendance at consultative structures participation in advisory committees participation in working groups attending conferences and workshops both in the netherlands and abroad occasional attendance at meetings and also being kept up to date by means of minutes of such meet ings held by local support networks on thb many bilateral contacts in person by telephone or email with a wide range of individuals and bodies. . this report where possible each chapter follows a similar pattern policy oriented information is dealt with first followed by the figures then any international developments and lastly relevant points of interest and bottlenecks. a lot has happened in relation to combating thb in the netherlands since the publication of the third report the last report which contained an extensive description of the develop ments in this area. still many points remain on which progress can and should be made. these are dealt with in chapter in the form of recommendations. these recommenda tions cover a wide range of issues including legislation and regulations victims of thb as sistance and the protection of interests law enforcement police and investigation and the pps and prosecution. legislation and regulations . introduction a number of changes have been introduced into legislation and regulations in the field of trafficking in human beings thb since the previous reports were issued. the principal amendment to dutch legislation was the finalisation and entering into force of the new thb provision in the dutch criminal code wetboek van strafrecht . . national legislation and regulations . . the new thb provision procedural the previous thb article a dutch criminal code was replaced by a new and extended article a on january . the purpose of this new article was to implement un and eu legislation in anticipation of the proposed ratification and implementation of these documents in dutch legislation. on september article a criminal code was renumbered without any substan tive alteration to the text to article f. ratification of un instruments the netherlands ratified the un convention against transnational organised crime new york november hereafter the un convention on may . ratification of the protocol to pre vent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children annex to the un state bulletin of acts and decrees . the optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography signed on may in new york treaties series the convention against transnational organised crime signed in new york on november treaty series the protocol to prevent suppress and punish trafficking in persons especially women and children supplementing the convention against transnational organised crime signed in new york on november t.s. and the protocol against the smuggling of migrants by land sea and air supplementing the convention against transnational organised crime signed in new york on november t.s. . the framework decision by the council on combating trafficking in human beings brussels july official journal of the eu l the council directive defining the facilitation of unauthorised entry transit and residence brussels november oj l the framework decision by the council on the strengthening of the penal framework to prevent the facilitation of unauthorised entry transit and residence brussels november oj l and the framework decision by the council on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography brussels december oj l . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur convention new york november hereafter the palermo protocol followed on july . the optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography new york may was ratified by the netherlands on august . july which was the final date for implementation of the eu council s framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings hereafter the framework decision on thb was not achieved since article a criminal code entered into force on january . the council framework decision on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography was implemented in time final date january . the new thb provision entails a significant extension of the conduct criminalised as thb in addition to sexual exploitation other forms of exploitation in the area of employment and services as well as forced or induced removal of organs. forcing or inducing another person to surrender the proceeds from sex work or from organ removal has also been criminal ised. the classification of thb was again introduced to cover all of these types of conduct. what is not covered by the thb provision the legislator has indicated a number of activities that it does not classify as thb. the first of these is illegal adoption which happens when a child is adopted or offered for adoption outside official channels for example without the permission of the parents and or the competent au thorities in the country of origin . the rules on international adoption are included in the act on the placement in the netherlands of foreign children with a view to adoption wet opneming buitenlandse kinderen ter adoptie. this act criminalises any adoption that is not in accordance with the current rules and procedures. it only constitutes thb if a child is adopted with the intent of exploiting that child. the sale and purchase of children in isolation and therefore not associated with adoption which has to be rendered a criminal offence on the basis of the convention of the rights of the child and its annex the optional protocol on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography is only punishable as thb if there is exploitation or an intention to exploit. it is not in fact clear whether and if so where the sale and purchase of children in other situations is rendered punishable. the case of the somali children who were brought to the netherlands and who after some years were returned to and on the same date the netherlands also ratified the protocol against the smuggling of migrants by land sea and air supplementing the convention against transnational organised crime treaties series . the same applies to implementation of the council s framework decision on the strengthening of the penal framework to prevent the facilitation of unauthorised entry transit and residence and for fulfilling the council directive defining the facilitation of unauthorised entry transit and residence both of which documents should have been implemented by december . forcing or inducing the surrender of income from other forms of work or services was not included in the relevant sub section . according to the minister of justice in the additional measures for the national action plan on thb nationaal actieplan mensenhandel parliamentary papers ii no. . the dutch criminal code also contains a number of penal provisions where specific activities in relation to giving up children are rendered criminal articles a b and c and art. as well as less directly articles and a dutch criminal code. legislation and regulations abandoned in somalia does not fall within the definition of thb either. according to the cabinet it is even questionable whether it could be classified as thb if the children were brought to the nether lands under false pretences and in an illegal manner to live here with someone who wanted to earn money from their residence here by giving them less money than the amount of child benefit because it is not clear whether such cases would involve the element of exploitation required for thb. if the children go to school and if they are fed and clothed the cabinet considers that the aspect of exploita tion is not immediately clear. however it does state in the letter that for example if heavy household work was to be combined with a failure to attend school this might amount to exploitation. such prac tices might well fall under the criminal provisions in relation to fraud people smuggling et cetera. the principal reason why these activities are not classified as thb is the fact that there is in principle no exploitation or intention to exploit as regards work or services. while a forced marriage may not necessarily be concluded with a view to exploitation it is described as a practice akin to slavery provided that there is payment of a consideration in money or in kind in the supplementary convention on the abolition of slavery the slave trade and institutions and practices similar to slavery this is one of the forms of exploitation specified in article f paragraph . schmidt and rijken however argue that this might be better to prosecute under the general provision on coercion art. dutch criminal code or as abuse rather than as thb. this would in any event appear to be more appropriate if there is no exploitation or intention to exploit . in addition to an extension of the scope of the thb article a number of new aggravating circumstances were added with appropriate penalties. the existing aggravating circum stances namely committed in association committed in relation to a victim below the age of or a combination of the two continue to be enforced with the same maximum pen alty but now apply to all forms of exploitation. the aggravating circumstance of resulting in serious bodily harm no longer applies as an element to be combined with one of the previ ously mentioned aggravating circumstances but is added as a separate element with a sub stantially higher maximum penalty of years. this sentence also applies to the newly added aggravating circumstance of threatening the life of another person . another aggra vating circumstance that has been added is resulting in death with a possible maximum of years imprisonment. sentences for non aggravated thb the legislative amendment left the penalty for thb without aggravating circumstances at a maximum of years. the minister of justice indicated that the gravity and seriousness of the offence were re flected in the proposed maximum penalties which the government considered were quite proportion in their letter to the lower house parliamentary papers ii no. . september unts . the differences in maximum penalties are of significant importance for example a maximum of nine months imprisonment or a monetary fine in category three for coercion. moreover coercion by threats of slander or libel is an offence prosecutable only in case of complaint. art. a and criminal code old now art. f and criminal code. art. a old . art. f criminal code. art. f criminal code. art. f criminal code. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur ate to the nature and gravity of the offence. but we should establish that the sentence for the basic of fence of thb could be described as light when compared with offences of a similar nature. the level of the maximum penalty also has consequences for the possibility of pre trial detention. the content of article a criminal code old was transferred albeit not literally into article f criminal code. the legislator intended to avoid introducing any amendment to what was already a punishable offence under article a criminal code old so that the detailed interpretation of that offence in terms of case law would also retain its significance under the new provision. article f criminal code became a very extensive and complex provision because it incorporated in a single provision on thb so many courses of con duct of disparate natures. the distinctions between various types of work and the fact that other elements of crime constitute thb when individuals below the age of fall victim re sulted in a large number of sub paragraphs to describe all of the courses of conduct being criminalised. the result is the longest article in the criminal code and not the easiest to un derstand. this is partly due to the use of a number of expressions which are not explained in greater detail. these expressions are drawn from the international documents underlying the new thb provision. in order to interpret article f criminal code one therefore re quires not only the explanatory memorandum but also the underlying international legisla tion which classifies thb as a serious form of organised crime and violation of human rights. at its core article f criminal code contemplates the criminalisation of excessive abuse of individuals in an employment or service provision relationship along with all conduct amounting to putting anyone into such a position. the offence of thb also encompasses profiting from such circumstances and forcing someone to surrender income from sex work and from the removal of organs. the article does not cover all wrongs in an employment or service provision relationship insofar as there is no excessive abuse the matter will have to be dealt with by means other than the thb provision. when assessing whether or not there has been excessive abuse the determining factors are the circumstances in which the victim finds himself or herself and under which he or she is put to work. the nature of the forced work is also relevant. in light of international legislation it is important whether the funda mental human rights of the victim have been violated or are under threat of violation by the conduct in question. if that is the case then there is excessive abuse which can be classi fied as exploitation within the meaning of thb. art. a code of criminal procedure if there is a suspicion of an offence where the statutory description applies a prison sentence of twelve years or more and public order is seriously compromised by the offence. in addition to exploitation art. f criminal code makes separate mention of the removal of organs in certain circumstances. legislation and regulations the key term exploitation exploitation is the central expression within the offence of thb. in fact according to the explana tory memorandum thb is aimed at exploitation . within the meaning of the thb article exploitation must be linked with a situation of labour or ser vices. there must also be an excess i.e. a breach of fundamental human rights . article f crimi nal code provides a non exhaustive list of what exploitation in this sense comprises exploitation of someone else in prostitution other forms of sexual exploitation forced or compulsory work or ser vices slavery and practices similar to slavery or servitude. this enumeration of situations which the legislator regards as exploitation does not however provide any clearly delimited criterion. a more detailed definition is therefore required. as regards the sex industry the legislator and the dutch su preme court recognise a circumstance as a case of exploitation if the party concerned ends up in a situation that is not equivalent to the situation in which an articulate prostitute tends to find herself in the netherlands. the nature of the work to be done is of major importance in this interpretation as it was formulated well before the abolition of the general ban on brothels. this is precisely why in other sectors not every situation worse than that likely to be encountered by an articulate worker will amount to exploitation. the nature of forced work in the sex industry means that exploitation comes about readily since physical integrity is at stake by definition. the same applies to forced organ re moval. as far as exploitation in other sectors is concerned it seems that the situation likely to be en countered by an articulate worker can be used as a point of reference but a more serious criterion seems appropriate. in these cases the issue of whether or not there is exploitation is to be determined principally by the gravity of the sub standard conditions the course leading there and the impact on the fundamental human rights of those involved. the precise threshold for non sexual exploitation is still vague. it is impossible to provide a simple de scription of an excess in an employment or service context as this needs to be assessed on a case by case basis but one of the defining factors in any event will be the inherent violation of fundamental human rights. to describe a situation as excessive there has to be at least one obvious excess or an ac cumulation of lesser wrongs. factors such as gravity duration scope and the economic benefit ob tained also play a part here. the single or cumulative excess should in principle be considered objec tively according to the current standards of dutch society and the dutch legal system. fundamental human rights again play a central part here. to be classified as exploitation the determining factor is not therefore whether the victim regards himself or herself as having been exploited though the vic tim s subjective experience may play a part in assessing whether he or she could have escaped from the exploitative situation. see also korvinus et al. . the central expression in the belgian and french criminalisation of thb is putting someone to work in circumstances incompatible with human dignity. there is also debate on this concept bontinck . parliamentary papers ii no. . e.g. supreme court february where there was a reference to the explanatory memorandum accompanying the introduction of art. ter criminal code. in relation to the sex industry the legislator and the supreme court identify a situation of exploitation when the person involved is in a situation inferior to the circumstances in which an articulate prostitute would normally operate in the netherlands. this might for example involve underpayment irregular payment long working hours being forced to work under a different identity confiscation of a passport or threats of dismissal if the person fails to do what he she is told to do. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur trafficking in human beings as defined in article f criminal code occurs if the exploita tion or the intent to exploit is accompanied by the application of some element of coer cion. coercion is not however a precondition for the existence of an exploitative situa tion. this follows from the fact that no coercion is required with respect to the definition of trafficking in minors while the intent for exploitation is required. exploitation nonetheless implies a certain degree of involuntariness on the part of those be ing exploited. the involuntary nature of the exploitative situation lurks in the impossibility of getting out of it. this is impossible in cases where measures are used which directly re strict physical freedom for example being locked up or watched . if the victim is controlled by his or her exploiter s by means other than physical restraint escape might be possible in practical terms but the victim s subjective assessment of the situation may impede him or her from escaping. the facts and circumstances should then confirm that it was reasonable for the victim to assume that he or she could not escape from the situation by his or her own efforts for example because of the perceived consequences for the victim of escaping. a lack of freedom then can also result from a relationship of debt with the employer or a third party the cultural context being a child or a combination of these factors. it is important in such an assessment to consider all facets of the situation and how these interrelate. exploitation in the sense of thb thus involves serious abuses with the victim s fundamental human rights being violated and where his or her freedom is restricted or he or she rea sonably feels this to be the case to such an extent that there is no escape from the situation. exploitation is the key term in article f criminal code. it is the final aim of the actions criminalised in article f and . the legislator clearly left the more detailed definition of the limits of exploitation outside the sex industry to the courts. at the time of writing bnrm is aware of three court verdicts at first instance in relation to this type of ex ploitation. this means that there is not yet much clarification on which abuses in relation to labour and services qualify as exploitation in the sense of thb. application of article criminal code article f criminal code specifies that article criminal code is to apply mutatis mutandis. article allows the courts to deprive individuals of certain rights and to stop them from exercising certain elements of coercion are understood to include those summarised at art. f dutch criminal code coercion violence or some other circumstance or threats of violence or other circumstances extortion fraud deception or misuse of an imbalance of power arising from the actual situation misuse of a vulnerable position or the giving or receiving of payment or benefits to obtain the agreement of someone who exercises control over someone else. there is also the use of an element of coercion to get the individual into the exploitative situation. the same element of coercion may also ensure that the person is hindered from getting out of the situation. the coerced removal of organs which also qualifies as thb is not described as exploitation but as a separate final aim of the actions described in the article. these cases involved the illegal employment of bulgarians as hemp pickers chinese in a restaurant and cleaners. in all cases the accused were exonerated at first instance on the thb charges see ljn az ljn ba and ljn bb . legislation and regulations professions in case of conviction for specific offences including the right to hold certain offices or to serve in the armed forces. . . amendments to the b regulation the b regulation chapter b of the aliens act implementation guidelines allows for eign nationals who are or might be victims of or witnesses to thb to reside legally in the netherlands on a temporary basis during the investigation and prosecution so as to be available to the police and the public prosecution service pps . the police ought to inform any foreign national who might be a victim of thb when there is a slight indication of thb of the rights described in the b regulation and offer him or her a period for reflection. the reflection period gives victims time to decide whether or not they want to report the crimi nal offence. for a period of maximum three months the expulsion of the victim from the netherlands is suspended. the b regulation has undergone a range of amendments since the new thb provision came into effect. the regulation has been made compatible with article f criminal code largely with retrospective effect to january so that it also applies to victims and witnesses who have reported the crime reporting witnesses of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. unlike victims of sexual exploitation however they were not offered any period for reflection. this amendment also introduced the possibility for victims and reporting witnesses of all forms of thb to work from the time when they receive a residence per mit but not before that during the reflection period. the possibility for working came into operation on april . a section on family reunification was also added making it possible for underage children of victims and reporting witnesses to obtain a residence permit with the same duration as that of the principal applicant. the requirement of suffi cient means does not apply in such cases. with effect from july victims of thb and others were exempted from the fees for applications for provisional residence permits authorisation for temporary stay and regular residence permits. this exemption also extends to their underage children coming to the netherlands in the context of family reunification. in november the opportunity to have a reflection period was extended to victims of all forms of exploitation. the regulation was also extended to a number of categories which had not previously been fully entitled to its benefits dutch government gazette . this requirement implies that a residence permit will only be granted if the principal applicant has sufficient independent and permanent means of existence. dutch government gazette . dutch government gazette . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the reflection period was opened up to foreign nationals already in the netherlands who might have been victims of thb outside the netherlands but have not yet been exploited in the netherlands foreign nationals who did not yet have access to the netherlands but who might be vic tims of thb were afforded the opportunity of reporting the crime. they are not how ever entitled to the reflection period either and reporting witnesses of all forms of thb were entitled to rights under the b regulation. the criteria for continued residence after expiry of a residence permit on the basis of the b regulation were amended with effect from august . if information on thb provided by a victim ultimately results in conviction of the suspect in relation to that thb the minister will henceforth assume that this implies in law that returning the victim to his or her country of origin involves risks. if the victim makes an application for continued residence in these circumstances it can be approved on these grounds. if the prosecution does not lead to a conviction but three years have passed since the b residence permit was awarded and no further appeal is possible against the verdict then the most signifi cant humanitarian factor to be considered by the minister will be the length of the victim s residence. these amendments only apply to victims of thb who have reported the of fence and have submitted an application for continued residence. the regulation does not apply to reporting witnesses. applications for continued residence by victims and wit nesses to which these criteria do not apply will be dealt with in accordance with the pre existing criteria in the b regulation. comments on the amendments mentioned above the amendments are certainly a step forward but also merit some comment. thus the former policy applies when a criminal case is dismissed by the pps but there is something to be said for applying the new and more generous policy in such cases. this will of course depend on the basis of the dismissal as dismissals based on suspect deceased or suspect untraceable deserve different consideration than dismissals for no valid proof or wrongly reported as a suspect . another point is that article f criminal code has a broad scope which encompasses cases with varying degrees of gravity. the amended b regulation makes no provision for this point. in more practical terms a foreign national who wishes to rely on one of the added categories must personally the previous position was that this only applied to prostitution and also the reflection period did not apply to this category of foreign nationals. and not as previously just reporting witnesses of thb for the purpose of sexual exploitation. letter dated august parliamentary papers ii no. resulting in an amendment to the aliens act implementation guidelines vreemdelingencirculaire a dated november state bulletin of acts and decrees. . the minister here uses an elective term. these are the following factors which play a significant part in connection with the application . the risk of reprisals against the party concerned or his her family and the extent of protection against these reprisals that the authorities in the country of origin are willing and able to be provide . risk of prosecution in the country of origin for example for prostitution and . the possibilities for social reintegration in the country of origin bearing in mind the specific cultural background and history of the party concerned in prostitution permanent disruption of family relationships social attitudes to prostitution and the relevant government policy. legislation and regulations lodge a copy of the court verdict as evidence. the problem however is that the victim is not a party to the proceedings and will not therefore automatically have a copy of the verdict and may not even be aware of it. this particular issue might in any event be partially ameliorated by ensuring that the victim is always assisted by a specialist legal adviser. the regulation also only mentions victims and not witnesses or reporting witnesses. a witness coop erating with investigation and prosecution can also run the risk of reprisals if his or her co operation contributes towards a conviction of the trafficker. in this respect the premise applicable to victims would also seem to be appropriate for witnesses. if the criminal case does not result in a prosecution then there is a condition that the victim must have resided in the netherlands on the basis of a b permit for three years at the date of the verdict. the minister will then regard the duration of the victim s residence as the most important humanitarian factor . if this ground depends on the fact that the victim has been contributing to the investigation and prosecution for three years or more the condition that there must have been a verdict in the criminal case is hard to understand. as the regulation is currently formulated it would be possible for a victim to spend more than three years facing uncertainty about his or her continued residence while coop erating in a lengthy criminal case. the amendments to the b regulation that have been implemented and announced are to a significant extent connected with shortcomings in the regulation previously established and also with the wish to introduce improvements and flexibility. not all of the shortcomings stem from the regulation itself though they are often connected with an incorrect applica tion of the regulation in practice. one proposed amendment relates to a category of victims who cooperate in investigation and prosecution in some way other than reporting the offence if the pps considers their residence to be necessary. when this chapter was being written the details of this proposal had not yet been elaborated. the distinction between reporting a crime and a statement is primarily of relevance in the context of criminal legislation. in order to circumvent the somewhat artificial distinction in the context of migration law it is recommended that a provision should be included in the b regulation to the effect that a statement from a witness will be the equivalent of a report of a crime for the purposes of applying the regulation. . . aliens employment act the minister of social affairs and employment stated back in in response to parlia mentary questions that the general prohibition on issuing employment permits for prosti tutes from outside the eu as formulated in the implementation order for the aliens em ployment act wet arbeid vreemdelingen wav would be abolished in the foreseeable fu ture.nrm this has not yet happened however. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur tax administration the prostitution sector and the aliens employment act ever since the general ban on brothels was abolished there has been a difference of understanding be tween operators prostitutes and the tax administration ta about how to consider prostitution work in sex businesses from the technical tax perspective. the operators would ideally want to be re garded as offering facilities rather than as employers and the women would prefer to be independent entrepreneurs. based on the factual circumstances however the ta has held time and time again that the operator prostitute relationship is to be classified as an employer employee one with the result that the operator has to withhold national insurance contributions and income tax and that social se curity legislation is also applicable. operators object to this and are always trying to introduce changes to prevent the ta from finding any relationship of authority. this has resulted in many legal proceed ings. an amendment to the implementation order for the aliens employment act provides for the possibility that has already been mentioned for victims of thb to earn income from work during their temporary residence under the b regulation. it is therefore possible for these foreign nationals to work starting from the time at which this temporary residence permit is issued. what is notable here is that a victim or witness may also work in prostitu tion even if she is not allowed to do so as an independent entrepreneur or an employee without a permit under the b regulation. . . other imminent legislation and regulations prevention of marriages of convenience act the prevention of marriages of convenience act wet voorkoming schijnhuwelijken came into effect on november with the aim of checking either before the marriage was concluded or before a marriage concluded abroad was registered in the dutch municipal administration on whether the marriage was not being entered into purely with a view to acquiring residence rights in the netherlands. in response to parliamentary questions the minister indicated that while he felt it possible that foreign nationals from outside the eu might apply for a residence permit to stay with a marriage partner so as to obtain access to prostitution work the standard checks on marriages of convenience would apply to such situations. in order to identify victims of thb the police use a list of indicators to help with identifying victims who also have residence entitlements. a marriage of convenience would therefore not according to the minister obstruct identification as a victim of thb. even when a victim of thb obtains a residence permit in the netherlands through marriage fol lowing residence based on the b regulation the checks on the prostitution sector and the thb legislation offer sufficient facilities according to the minister for identifying any vic tims or perpetrators of thb so that there is no need for any extra measures to allow for applica tion of the prevention of marriages of convenience act in relation to the fight against thb. where the ta is often held to be correct. legislation and regulations review of maximum penalties act the review of maximum penalties act wet herijking strafmaxima came into effect on february . the act includes adjustment of the categories of monetary fines increas ing the monetary fine in category five which can be imposed for thb from to . bill to strengthen the position of the victim in criminal proceedings in a letter of march the government of the netherlands informed the council of the eu about the adoption into its national law of the obligations in the framework deci sion on the status of the victim in criminal proceedings hereafter the eu framework deci sion on victim care . in this letter the government informed the council generally speaking we can say that the netherlands has implemented all provisions of the said framework decision. in the national action plan on thb nationaal actieplan mensenhan del nam the government also indicated when responding to a recommendation from the nrm that the eu framework decision on the status of victims in criminal proceed ings has not resulted in any amendment of dutch legislation or regulations. there was no need for this because a high level of victim care is already offered in the netherlands. the aim of the proposed bill to strengthen the position of victims in criminal proceedings is to provide clarity for victims of a crime on their rights and possible role during the prior investigation and at trial based on the principle that a victim s position in criminal proceed ings should be more clearly described than is currently the case under the dutch code of criminal procedure. the bill defines the victim s rights in the criminal proceedings in terms of how he or she is treated information compensation and the right to speak at the hearing. it should be pointed out that the victim s interest needs to be balanced against the justified but possibly contrary interests of other parties to the proceedings such as the accused. only a victim who has suffered a proprietary loss or other disadvantage as a direct conse quence of the crime can rely on the provisions. this general scheme for victims is relevant to victims of thb because these rights are not conditioned on any cooperation in the inves tigation and prosecution phases. the victim must of course be known to the judicial sys tem. the explanatory memorandum indicates anyone who reports to the police as a vic tim is in principle entitled to be treated correctly. there may however be a limited number of cases where a false statement or false report is made. but this is no reason for assuming that a victim is not acting in good faith . the explanatory memorandum continues that victims remain victims until the contrary is established and the degree of police and minis try of justice involvement will depend in the first instance on the gravity of the offence. the more serious the offence the greater the effort that can be expected from the judicial system certainly if the case involves a serious infringement of the victim s physical integrity. these act of december state bulletin of acts and decrees no. . letter on the evaluation of the framework decision on victim care from the minister of justice to the secretary general of the council of the eu. framework decision of march oj l . nrm recommendation . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur cases require extra care on the part of the police and the ministry of justice whether or not the crime is subsequently solved. because the nature of the offence of thb involves by definition a violation of fundamental human rights one of these being the right to physical integrity this increased effort on the part of the police and the ministry of justice will al ways apply to victims of thb. secure juvenile care bill wetsvoorstel gesloten jeugdzorg the lower house has been dealing with the secure juvenile care bill since the summer of . the bill s aim is to create a facility for compulsory reception secure residence and the application of measures such as mandatory treatment for juveniles with serious behav ioural problems within the framework of the juvenile care act wet op de jeugdzorg . this is only possible within the current statutory system if the minor is placed in a judicial juvenile institution under civil law proceedings. as far as thb is concerned the existing system re sults in minor victims such as loverboy victims sometimes being placed in the same insti tution as the perpetrators. at the moment placement compulsory or otherwise in a judicial juvenile institution is also only possible for those below the age of majority the possibility of mandatory assistance comes to an end as soon as the juvenile reaches the age of majority. in practice the result is that and year old juveniles an age category which is a preferred focus for loverboysnrm are no longer being taken into reception compulsorily because the assistance will have little impact in the available remaining time. the bill also contemplates a widening of the circle to include juveniles up to the age of of individuals who will be covered by the amended juvenile care act. the condition will be that there is already a court order in place on the date they reach the age of majority. orders from the courts will be required for reception and residence in a mandatory setting according to the bill. juveniles up to the age of with serious family problems will poten tially be subject to such an order. there must also be a need for reception into a secure set ting so as to prevent the youngster from evading the requisite care or from being withdrawn from such care by others. examples quoted in the explanatory memorandum in this con text include girls ending up facing problems under the influence of a loverboy. loverboys often wait until the girl in question has reached the age of thus falling outside the scope of the statutory facilities for mandatory assistance. the proposal to extend the scope of appli cation of the juvenile care act to year olds will offer greater elbowroom here provided that the juvenile care has been embarked upon before they turn . the bill as it proposed would also allow for the placement of victims of loverboys outside judicial juvenile institutions so that they would no longer be locked up in institutions where the perpetrators of this type of activity might also be sent. parliamentary papers ii no. . legislation and regulations memorandum on illegal aliens the minister for immigration and integration submitted the memorandum on illegal aliens illegalennota to the lower house on april . this document presented measures to address the problem of foreign nationals residing illegally in the netherlands. on the one hand these measures are intended to combat illegal residence in the netherlands more forcefully while on the other hand they are designed to address abuse of the vulnerable position in which such illegals may find themselves. human trafficking is a topic in the document because exploiters are prominent where illegal residence is involved. in addition to fighting these profiteers one of the underlying principles in the battle against illegal resi dence is that illegals are entitled to be treated humanely. the memo states that if thb is opposed effectively it will make a significant contribution to the battle against illegal residence. after all the parasitical infra structures behind illegal immigration will also be impacted by the fight against thb under criminal law. it goes on to present a number of concrete measures to counteract thb. these fall within the areas of ac cess for the police to systems in the immigration process investment in information led in vestigation of thb recognition of signs of thb in the context of the supervision of foreign nationals and the standard inclusion in campaign plans in the context of the supervision of foreign nationals that the police will offer possible victims of thb an opportunity to re port the crime. in the written consultation between the minister and the lower house standing justice committee the minister indicated that the first interest to be served in thb cases is that of the victim. minimum wage and minimum holiday allowance act the lower house has repeatedly indicated that the introduction of the free movement of workers from the new member states in the eu can only count on support from the house once a flanking policy in connection with the enforcement of employment condi tions has been introduced. this desire on the part of the house was partly the reason behind the bill amending the minimum wage and minimum holiday allowance act in connec tion with the introduction of administrative enforcement. this act converts what is at the moment purely civil law enforcement of compliance with the minimum wage and mini mum holiday allowance act into administrative enforcement in the form of an ability to impose administrative penalties. whereas an employee receiving less than the statutory minimum wage currently has to embark on a civil law action against his employer the memo on illegals. additional measures for the fight against illegality and dealing with those who exploit illegals in the netherlands parliamentary papers ii no. . many people regard the use of the term illegals as offensive. in this context it means those who are residing in the netherlands illegally. parliamentary papers ii no. . with the exception of cyprus and malta. act of march to amend the minimum wages and minimum holiday bonus act in connection with the introduction of administrative enforcement state bulletin of acts and decrees . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur health and safety inspectorate arbeidsinspectie ai will be able to impose an administra tive penalty on the employer up to a maximum of for each employee affected. the actual level of this penalty will depend on the extent of underpayment. if the employer should re offend within months the penalty will be increased by . after first allowing the employer one month within which to pay the employees the arrears of their wages a time limit may be imposed under threat of a daily penalty payment within which the em ployer must pay the employees the wages due to them. if the employer fails to comply then the daily penalty charge becomes due. this fortifies the position of employees and may counter individual abuse within employ ment relationships. the reason for introducing this administrative enforcement is that em ployees who are underpaid seldom file a complaint with the ai or commence legal action against their employers as well as an expectation that workers from the new eu member states will be less inclined to do so than their native dutch counterparts. this amendment might be used as a tool in the battle against thb. . international . . introduction many agreements have been made within the major international organisations in recent years binding and otherwise about how to combat thb and these have served as the driv ing force for national endeavours. the focus now lies on a project oriented approach in the sphere of implementation. this section outlines the developments relevant to the nether lands in the area of international legislation and regulations since the appearance of the third report. . . united nations the un has organised three meetings in relation to the united nations convention against transnational organised crime and the un protocol to prevent suppress and punish traffick ing in persons especially women and children hereafter the palermo protocol which supplements that convention since these documents came into effect. the purpose of the meetings was to discuss the state of affairs in relation to the implementation of these documents by the convention member states. the first meeting dealt principally with adapting national legislation to the requirements of the convention and the protocol and covered penal legislation and the problems experienced by member states in its imple mentation as well as the stimulation of international cooperation. the second meeting fo cussed primarily on protecting and assisting victims as well as repatriating victims and de veloping indicators for forced labour. the third meeting again focussed on the protec according to the explanatory memorandum accompanying the bill. from june to july and from to october . the meetings also related to the implementation legislation and regulations tion and repatriation of victims but also covered prevention exchange of information and training. in january the dutch government published the fourth dutch implementation re port on the un convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women cedaw un women s convention . the committee on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women cedaw committee discussed this at its th meeting. in the report the dutch government explored the recommendations from the cedaw committee on the second and third dutch implementation reports to cedaw. human trafficking was dealt with in the report partly because the un conven tion contains a provision article on trafficking in women. information about the nrm the investigation and prosecution of thb the b regulation victim support and the dutch contribution to the international podium was supplied in the context of the state of affairs as regards article . the abolition of the general ban on brothels was also explained and an indication was provided of developments in policy and practice in that area. there was however a sizeable gap between the period covered by the report and the moment at which the cedaw committee dealt with it. the information in the report dated from while there have been several developments in the battle against thb and in relation to prostitution since then. as usual ngos prepared a shadow report commenting on the government report for the cedaw committee. the shadow report in response to the fourth implementation report came out on june and was entitled taking women s rights seriously the ngos confirmed in the shadow report that there had been improvements in as re gards the b regulation but that there were still major problems in relation to how the regulation is applied and structural shortcomings in the regulation itself. the ngos con cluded that the current regulation is inadequate for meeting the needs and interests of victims. the conclusions of the cedaw committee appeared in february . in april de un high commissioner for refugees issued interpretative guidelines for judicial appeal bodies and governments on the application of the un convention relating of the protocol against the smuggling of migrants by land sea and air which we are not considering here. conference of the parties to the united nations convention against transnational organised crime third session vienna october . un cedaw c nld february . the th meeting was held in new york from january to february . comments were also made on the traffic in women in the context of other articles in the convention for instance art. violence against women . the netherlands was called on to provide for the extension of temporary protection visa reintegration and support services to all victims of trafficking including those who are not able or willing to cooperate in the investigation and prosecution of human traffickers concluding comments of the committee on the elimination of discrimination against women netherlands cedaw c nld co february . its involvement in this subject area stems partly from its responsibility to guarantee that refugees asylum seekers and similar categories of individuals do not fall victim to thb and partly from its responsibility to guarantee that possible victims are identified as victims also when they return to their countries of origin and receive the international protection prescribed in these circumstances. guidelines on international protection unhcr april hcr gip . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur to the status of refugees hereafter the refugee convention to victims of thb and indi viduals running the risk of becoming subject to trafficking. the crux of these guidelines is that the refugee convention can apply to potential victims of thb. for this to be the case all of the requirements of the definition of refugee must be met. there must accord ingly be a reasonable fear of prosecution on one of the grounds of prosecution mentioned in the convention. if this is the case the potential victim can receive protection under the refugee convention. this protection is in addition to the protection contemplated under the palermo protocol. the unhcr guidelines draw no distinction between the various manifestations of thb nor in relation to the age or sex of the potential victim. when interpreting the refugee convention in actual cases however being underage and being a woman seem to afford a greater likelihood of being covered by the scope of the convention. the aim of the international convention on the protection of the rights of all migrant workers and members of their families abbreviated to the migrant workers convention is to promote equal treatment of migrants including employment opportunities equivalent to those of state subjects. since it came into effect on july the number of states acced ing to the convention has grown from to . these do not however include any desti nation nations for migrants. the convention may have an important part to play in ad dressing the exploitation of migrants as it also contemplates the battle against inhumane living and working conditions physical and sexual abuse and degrading treatment includ ing slavery servitude and forced or compulsory labour. the netherlands does not intend to sign the convention however because the absence of any distinction between legal and illegal migrant workers as regards the granting of rights is incompatible with the un derlying principle of the benefit entitlement residential status act koppelingswet . the united nations human rights commission decided at its th meeting under the topic human rights of women to appoint a special rapporteur on trafficking in persons es pecially in women and children. the job of this rapporteur is to focus on the human rights of victims of thb and to report each year to the commission including any recommen dations on measures that might be required to protect victims human rights. the com mission specifically asked the rapporteur to respond to reliable information on possible violations of human rights from actual or possible victims of thb and to collaborate with other relevant rapporteurs such as the special rapporteur on violence against women. the rapporteur was also asked to collaborate with relevant un bodies regional organisations and victims and their representatives. the rapporteur receives individual complaints of violations of human rights and undertakes working visits to countries in order to make recommendations based on these visits for improvements to the prevention of thb and these are race religion nationality and belonging to a particular social group or political conviction. e cn. l. . the th meeting took place between march and april and the rapporteur was appointed on october for a period of three years. the special rapporteur on violence against women visited the netherlands in july . the findings and rec ommendations can be found in the report of the special rapporteur on violence against women its causes and consequences yakin ert rk mission to the netherlands a hrc add. february . legislation and regulations how to deal with the problem and for the improvement of the protection of victims hu man rights. reports by the special rapporteur on trafficking in persons especially in women and children the rapporteur has prepared three reports to date. a report appeared in in which she set out her mandate operating methods strategy and priorities. her report of covered the relationship be tween thb and the demand for commercial sex. this report was criticised in many quarters. at the start of the rapporteur issued a report on forced marriages. also under the heading of human rights of women the human rights commission at its th meeting adopted a resolution on trafficking in women and children. this resolu tion urged governments to deal with any factors that might encourage thb to criminalise thb and to combat the use of the internet as a facilitative tool for thb. the general assembly of the united nations has also in numerous resolutions reports and other documents commented on the subject of thb frequently in the context of other topics such as the protection of migrants transnational organised crime and the role of women in development. specific to the subject of trafficking in women and girls the general assembly prepared a resolution emphasising in addition to a summary of earlier documents concerning the fight against thb the importance of data collection in ternational cooperation education prevention and awareness campaigns. states were also called on to appoint for example a national rapporteur. the third committee social humanitarian and cultural affairs called for a more gender specific approach to thb in october by way of the draft resolution on trafficking of women and girls. the draft resolution was designed to encourage the general assem bly towards an approach more strongly oriented towards gender and age on the assump tion that women and girls are more vulnerable to thb. it also encouraged international collaborative links. governments were called on to counteract the demand for trafficked integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective report of the special rapporteur on trafficking in persons especially women and children e cn. december . integration of the human rights of women and the gender perspective report of the special rapporteur on trafficking in persons especially women and children e cn. february . see for example statement on the nd annual report of the special rapporteur on the human rights aspects of victims of trafficking in persons especially women and children sigma huda integration on the human rights of women and a gender perspective human rights council united nations geneva september various authors http action.web.ca home catw readingroom.shtml x aa ex session eaba ee b a bee f c d sfgdata . implementation of general assembly resolution of march entitled human rights council report of the special rapporteur on the human rights aspects of the victims of trafficking in persons especially women and children a hrc january . resolution on trafficking in women and girls e cn. l. . for example ga resolution a res march . for example ga resolution a res february . for example ga resolution a august . ga resolution a res february . see ga shc november . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur women and girls and to make a greater investment in age and gender specific measures in the fight against thb. governments were also to use prevention to stop the demand for sex tourism and to provide resources for victim rehabilitation programmes. in de cember the general assembly then adopted a resolution on trafficking in women and girls. . . european union the directive on the residence permit issued to third country nationals who are victims of traffick ing in human beings or who have been the subject of an action to facilitate illegal immigration who cooperate with the competent authorities hereafter the temporary residence permit directive was adopted on april . this directive is compulsorily applicable in eu member states to victims of thb and optional for victims of people smuggling and it offers these categories of individuals a period for reflection of undefined duration and a temporary residence permit insofar as the victim s presence is required for investigation and prosecution the victim clearly intends to cooperate in this and he or she has also bro ken all ties with the person s suspected of the crime. during the period of residence the victim must be offered certain facilities in the areas of accommodation protection finan cial resources language and translation help medical assistance and training and em ployment and the member state can offer free legal assistance. implementation in the netherlands the member states ought to have brought their primary and or subordinate legislation in line with this directive not later than august . in the spring of the netherlands notified the ec of the completion of the implementation path for the temporary residence permit directive. the re gime set out there does not extend to people smuggling. the present b regulation is formulated in broader terms than the requirements under the directive. unlike the directive the b regulation applies not only to third country nationals but also to citizens of the eu and it contains a separate regime for witnesses of thb also the period for reflection that has been chosen is not just an extremely mini mal one. the b regulation also provides opportunities for continued residence some thing not called for in the directive and free legal assistance is also potentially available in the netherlands. resolution adopted by the general assembly on the report of the third committee a trafficking in women and girls a res february december . the secretary general was also asked in this resolution to report to the general assembly during the rd session on successful interventions and strategies for a gender specific approach to thb. directive ec april oj l . . . these are non eea citizens. with the exception of dutch nationals. legislation and regulations the eu council of ministers approved the hague programme at its meeting on and november . this is a medium term programme for eu policy containing ten pri ority areas for strengthening the scope of freedom security and justice within the eu. one of these is the development of a balanced migration policy. this includes the imple mentation of measures against illegal migration and thb on the one hand and the prepa ration of a plan concerning legal migration on the other hand. the hague programme in vited the council and the ec to prepare a plan in for developing community stan dards best practices and mechanisms to prevent and fight against thb. an action plan was prepared with a view to realising the priorities within the programme. this action plan states that a communication on thb will be prepared and that there will be an evaluation and where necessary further development of legislation on thb and of the le gal framework for preventing and combating the practice of trafficking in human organs tissue and cells. an ec experts group on trafficking in human beings started up in . the members take part in the group in their individual capacity. the group has advisory functions for the ec in connection with thb and issues reports and opinions for that purpose. the dutch member was elected to the chair. the first and most important task of the experts group was to prepare a report based on the brussels declaration nrm in order to advise the ec on new initiatives in the fight against thb at the eu level. this report which was submitted to the commissioner for justice freedom and security contained concrete proposals for implementation of the recommendations in the brussels declaration. the proposals cover issues as defining thb victim support and assistance law enforcement and topics that are constants in the fight against thb such as the importance of human rights migration children and the collection and exchange of data. based partly on these recommendations the ec prepared the communication on the fight against trafficking in human beings. the communication on fighting trafficking in human beings an integrated approach and proposals for an action plan was the long awaited response by the ec to the report of the eu experts group and is also the formal implementation of the request under the hague programme to the council and ec to prepare a plan for common standards and tried and tested methods for preventing and fighting thb and intensifying in the fight against ille gal immigration. the communication covers a number of actions to be undertaken by the eu and or the member states. the underlying principle is that thb can only be tackled through an integrated approach based on respect for human rights and by taking account of the fact that thb is a world wide phenomenon. the communication makes the protection of human rights the key is eu council d november . action plan to implement the hague programme for strengthening the scope of freedom security and law in the european union oj c august . decision of march oj l march . report of the experts group on trafficking in human beings brussels december . notice com october . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur sue in the eu policy on thb. this covers not only the human rights of possible victims but also those of the suspects and perpetrators in thb cases. the communication explic itly states that under international law and international obligations states which tolerate thb or who do nothing about it are violating human rights. preventing and combating thb is described as a powerful driving force for the eu in its efforts to fight against illegal immigration. from this perspective the communication also contains measures in con nection with border checks and migration management. eurojust and europol have im portant parts to play in the fight against thb member states are therefore urged to make more use of both bodies in their fight against thb. the promotion of equality is a cen tral issue in the fight against thb because many of the possible victims are women children of people from ethnic or other minority groups. specifically with regard to chil dren the convention on the rights of the child must be a key element and account must also be taken of other international mechanisms aimed specifically at the protection of children s rights. the communication also contains a plea for basing policies against thb on a clear picture of the scale of the problem. the importance of data collection at the na tional level which can then be compared at the eu and global levels is underlined. the ec will be investigating the options here. the member states are once again called on to appoint independent institutions such a national rapporteur who can collect information systematically and maintain an overview of national action plans. finally the communi cation indicates how to organise coordination and collaboration in each country between member states and the eu and between the eu and other countries in order to achieve the aims of the policy directed against thb. it is worth pointing out that the eu looks be yond its own regional context here it encourages worldwide collaboration with other countries and other international organisations. in response to the invitation in the hague programme to put together a plan for develop ing community standards best practices and mechanisms for preventing and fighting against thb the council prepared the eu plan on best practices standards and procedures for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings hereafter the human trafficking action plan . the action plan included core recommendations and action points from the communication. the action plan was also partially based on the expert group s report and consists of an overview of actions in the area of co ordinating eu efforts mapping the problem prevention repression of demand investigation and prosecution protection of and assistance for victims repatriation and reintegration and external rela tions. it contemplates the involvement of the eu and its member states in the prevention of and fight against all forms of thb as well as devoting attention to protecting assisting and rehabilitating victims. the action plan states that an integral approach based on re spect for human rights and taking account of the global nature of the problem is impor tant for dealing effectively with the situation. the council also regards a fact based ap oj c december . the same applies to the recommendations stemming from a conference on thb organised by the eu presidency along with sweden on and october in brussels. legislation and regulations proach as being important and emphasises the use of data collection in order to map out the nature and scale of the problem. a victim oriented approach must be championed with full protection of the victim s human rights at every phase. in cases involving under age victims this relates in particular to the un convention on the rights of the child. the actions in the action plan for each action the action plan cites the aim the body responsible for implementation the date by which the action should be completed and the indicators for assessment. concrete actions include the organisation of a political debate on eu thb policy the development of common guidelines for the collection of data and comparable indicators the preparation of eu campaign material on pre vention and the improvement of information exchange with and via europol and interpol. meet ings should be organised on a range of subjects. while the introduction to the action plan indicates that it will be regularly updated and while it sets definite deadlines the coordination of the plan s implementation is not progressing in an optimal manner. the reason is that the responsibility for this coordination has not yet been specifically allocated to anyone so that it depends on the presi dent of the eu whether and to what extent there is any further implementation of the action plan. on the initiative of finland when holding the eu presidency there was a discussion on the follow up to the action plan in november within the multidisciplinary group on organised crime. the member states were called on to give their views on the desirability of a single point of contact in each member state for implementation of the action plan the desirability and methodology for monitoring and evaluating the plan and the setting of priority areas for attention in the battle against thb. in december the justice and home affairs council noted the current state of affairs as regards the eu human trafficking action plan and called for continued supervision and evaluation of the measures it contained during and . on may seven member states of the eu including the netherlands concluded a convention to intensify cross border cooperation in the fight against crime. this con vention of pr m specifically deals with the battle against terrorism cross border crime and illegal migration which includes thb. the most important element of the convention is the improvement of information exchange among the states party to this convention. this involves for instance setting up and mutually opening up national dna registers making facilities available for computerised fingerprint identification the provision of non personal data and also personal data in certain circumstances. provision has also been made for the secondment of document advisors in the member countries who can advise and provide training on passport and visa related matters. subject to strict conditions the convention also forms the basis for joint patrols and other joint actions on the territories of the states party to the convention. there is also the option for mutual assistance on re quest in matters such as inquiring as to the residential address of an individual or signifi cant in the context of the battle against thb establishing whether an individual is pre brussels november limite . belgium germany spain france luxembourg the netherlands and austria. convention on the stepping up of cross border cooperation particularly in combating terrorism cross border crime and illegal migration ec brussels july . . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur pared to make a statement. the convention contains extensive provisions on data protec tion. a check will be made within three years after it entered into force as to whether the provisions in the convention can be brought within the legal framework of the eu. finland is considering accession to the convention and italy portugal and slovenia have also expressed their interest. prompted by a report from one of its members the european parliament ep adopted the resolution entitled strategies to prevent the trafficking of women and children who are vul nerable to sexual exploitation. in this resolution the ep states that despite many treaties declarations laws and rules no truly tangible improvements have been achieved in the fight against thb particularly as regards trafficking in women and children. the ep calls for a holistic and integral multi disciplinary approach to the problem at eu and interna tional levels and underlines the importance of an approach based on human rights. the resolution goes on to summarise a large number of issues considered important by the ep in the battle against thb. these include matters such as the establishing of clear targets such as a reduction in the number of victims over the next years a more coherent policy acknowledging the relationship between thb and migration improvement of op erational collaboration more research into the underlying causes of thb discourage ment of the demand side the launching of an eu awareness campaign and the appoint ment of national rapporteurs by the member states. the european council is called on to make an annual assessment of steps taken in the member states to counter thb and the member states are asked to criminalise clients who knowingly and willingly use the ser vices of coerced prostitutes. the resolution is not a binding one. migration is an important topic for the eu. because of its relatively high levels of welfare the eu has a great power of attraction for labour migrants who try to enter the eu both legally and illegally. on the instructions of the ec research was carried out as to whether opportunities for entering the eu legally had a discouraging effect on illegal immigration and the extent to which legal immigration policy influenced cooperation with third coun tries in the battle against illegal migration the ec presented the results of this research in the communication on the study on the links between legal and illegal migration. one of the conclusions was that there may well be a link between legal and illegal migration but that it is a complex one and definitely not a direct link. with specific reference to thb the communication only states that the power of attraction of the black labour circuits is a significant factor in the continuing illegal migration and that many workers in the infor mal economy are denied the rights enjoyed and exercised by other workers. according to a press release from the finnish government dated december finland s accession to the convention of pr m under discussion in parliament . report on strategies to prevent the trafficking of women and children who are vulnerable to sexual exploitation a december . ep resolution p ta prov january . this wrongly assumes that the number of victims of thb is a known figure. it is quite possible that the extra attention being sought in relation to the subject will have precisely the effect of increasing the number of victims who are identified. communication com june . legislation and regulations in the ec followed up with a communication containing a policy plan on legal mi gration hereafter the legal migration communication . this communication pre pared in response to a call in the hague programme and following on the green paper on an eu approach to managing economic migration describes the proposed actions and legis lative initiatives of the ec towards a coherent policy in relation to legal immigration into the eu taking into account the impact of this for third countries. the only comment in this communication in relation to thb is that admission of economic migrants is inextri cably linked with integration measures on the one hand and the battle against illegal im migration and illegal employment including thb on the other hand. the eu must inten sify its efforts towards reducing the informal economy since this economy is an obvious factor attracting illegal immigration and a catalyst for exploitation. the subject of thb received more attention in the communication on policy priorities in the fight against illegal immigration by third country nationals. this communication refers to the eu human trafficking action plan and comments that the latter sets out the agenda for the fight against thb in the medium term. it adds that the eu will continue to provide finance primarily via its policy development measures to abolish the factors that render people vulnerable to thb such as poverty discrimination and inadequate access to educational opportunities. a basic principle in targeting illegal immigration is the removal of attractive factors illegal employment is one of the most important of these. it undermines the credi bility of legal opportunities for immigration and can result in serious exploitation which cannot be tolerated within the eu according to the communication. it also states the pri orities of the ec for implementation of the action plan on thb the development of co ordination and cooperation mechanisms at the eu level the promotion of best practices in detection and victim support the formation of networks involving international and non governmental organisations and the development of guidelines for data collection. the communication has been submitted to the council of the european parliament for a response. the draft directive on common standards and procedures in member states for returning ille gally staying third country nationals contains general standards for the compulsory re turn of third country nationals who reside in eu illegally respecting their human rights. the draft specifies that the directive will apply except insofar as more favourable provi sions apply including those formulated in the temporary residence permit directive. since the latter applies to victims of thb the draft directive will often not apply to them. in the run up to the football world cup the ep presented the resolution on forced prostitution in the context of world sports events. in this the ep called on the council and communication com december . com january . com july . this communication is a supplement to the legal migration communication and states that many phenomena can be understood to fall within the expression illegal immigration including illegal entry as a result of thb. directive of the european parliament and council com september . p ta prov march . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the member states to embark on an eu wide campaign to inform and instruct the general public but principally sportsmen and their fans about the problem of forced prostitution during major sporting events. this resolution was undoubtedly prompted by the widely expressed opinion that the football world cup would result in a huge temporary in crease in demand for sexual services and therefore also possibly for thb. the german government ngos and the world cup organisers took various steps to counteract forced prostitution. there was however no evidence of the feared increase in forced prostitution preliminary data from the german ministry for families parents women children shows that there was actually a decrease in the number of reported cases of thb around the time of the world cup. an investigation by iom sida led to the same conclusion. in this resolution the ep repeated its request to set up a day against trafficking in hu man beings. this proposal has been accepted by the ec. the palermo protocol signed by the eu on december was approved on behalf of the community on july . the scope of the ec powers to accede to the protocol and thus the extent to which the community is bound to it is limited to the areas in which it has exclusive external powers development cooperation article eu treaty eco nomic financial and technical cooperation with third countries article a eu treaty and visa asylum immigration and other policy areas associated with the free movement of individuals title iv eu treaty . . . council of europe the recommendation domestic slavery servitude au pairs and mail order brides was added to the long list of recommendations from the parliamentary assembly of the council of europe in . the assembly confirmed that thousands of people are being held as slaves in europe despite the abolition of slavery. these are mainly women working in pri vate households as migrant domestic workers au pairs or mail order brides. many of them arrived voluntarily but some were misled bound by debt contracts and trafficked. the council of europe coe has to be in the forefront of the battle against all forms of slavery according to the assembly which makes recommendations to the committee of ministers to undertake the fight against thb. these are subdivided into general recom mendations and recommendations relating to domestic slavery au pairs and mail order brides. apart from calling for the preparation of a charter of rights for domestic staff and guidelines for the recognition and protection of the status of au pairs the recommenda tions relate principally to matters covered in the coe convention to combat trafficking in persons. see www.sida.se shared jsp download.jsp f world cup study final report.pdf a . appendix c to council decision july . the same decision also approved the un protocol on people smuggling on behalf of the ec. pa recommendation . legislation and regulations the council of europe convention on action against trafficking in human beings hereafter the coe human trafficking convention is the result of the discussions in the comit ad hoc sur la lutte contre la traite des tres humains cahteh .nrm the convention was accepted by the committee of ministers on may and opened up for signature on may . the convention has been signed by states including the netherlands seven of which had also ratified it when writing this report. it enters into force when states have ratified it of which at least eight are coe member states. the convention takes as its starting point the palermo protocol but applies to all forms of thb both national and international and whether or not associated with organised crime article . the human rights approach is one of the convention s important angles ac cording to the preamble thb is a violation of human rights and an offence to the dignity and the integrity of the human being. the purposes of the convention article are threefold . preventing and combating thb . protecting the human rights of victims and ensuring effective investigation and prosecution and . promoting international coopera tion on action against thb. the convention then continues with a large number of provi sions in which the convention s member states are urged to adopt measures to a consid erable extent in mandatory language. while the original notion of the cahteh that this should be a mandatory convention on all fronts has not been entirely achieved the convention goes further than other existing international documents as regards the ex tent of its compulsory character. policy and other changes based on the text of the convention bnrm has looked into which issues in the convention necessi tate the amendment of dutch policy and practice. the findings were communicated to the ministry of justice and included the following observations. in the convention the status of being a victim and not the victim s residential status determines whether or not certain rights and facilities will be granted. residential status is the predominant fac tor in the present b regulation however. the government could therefore consider producing a general regulation for all victims of thb which would include a residence permit if necessary rather than maintaining a specific regulation only for those victims who are foreign nationals. the convention urges that an indication be given of the precise limits of the expression exploitation in the context of thb. the convention expects coordination at the national level among the various partners in the chain which can be either public or private organisations or agencies. this sort of umbrella coordination in warsaw may council of europe series of treaties no. . the netherlands signed on november . the position at april the ratifying countries are moldavia may romania august austria october albania february georgia march slovakia march and bulgaria april . on the last points in particular there is still discussion on the scope of application of the un protocol. by including article any such discussion is avoided for this convention. a proposition to which the dutch government has never yet subscribed in as many words but which now appears to have been accepted with the proposed ratification. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur action against thb does not exist at the moment and this might be regarded as a call to set up a task force on thb. the adoption of a range of measures in various areas to discourage the demand that leads to thb requires an impetus for example taking the form of a broad public campaign. the netherlands must strengthen its alert systems and approach to thb by means of training and public private cooperation. the obligation to adopt measures in order to identify foreign nationals who are victims of thb be fore they are expelled from the country means that the memorandum on illegal aliens illegalennota has to be adjusted to the extended definition of thb. when there are signs of thb and any uncertainty about the age of a juvenile the presumption must be that he or she is a minor. this makes it extra important that if there is any doubt about age during the first interview under asylum procedures there should also be extra watchfulness for any signs of thb. a victim s right to assistance should disconnected from his or her cooperation as a witness. because this right is not connected to any specific point of time in the proceedings it should also apply after the reflection period. as a consequence the crucial requirement in the b regulation for a victim re porting the crime should be deleted. the term cooperation as used in the convention has also a wider meaning than the obligation to report the crime in order to be eligible for a renewable resi dence permit. the convention cites the competent authority s opinion that residence is deemed necessary owing to the victim s personal situation as being grounds for the obligatory issue of a renewable residence permit. compensation for the victim is formulated in terms of a right which raises the question of how such a right can be put into practice if a perpetrator cannot be found or has no detectible assets. in the event of repatriation and return of victims there seems to be an assumption that an analysis of the individual victim s security situation will be carried out by the country initiating the return. the current b regulation does not include any obligation to take steps to protect the family mem bers of victims and witnesses of thb. there is a question as to how such a far reaching obligation could be implemented in practical terms. the convention provides for the setting up of a group of independent experts greta which will monitor the implementation of the convention. for an international docu ment in the field of thb this is a unique instrument. the intention is that greta based on information which the member states to the convention are obliged to supply will prepare an analysis of the convention s implementation by the member states supple mented by recommendations on how to address any identified bottlenecks. its report will be published after an opportunity has been given to make and receive comments on it thus including the right to hear and be heard. because the convention does not provide any procedure for enforcing the implementation of recommendations the main impetus providing this monitoring mechanism with persuasive force will be the public pillory ef fect . the election procedure for the election of the experts between and in number legislation and regulations who will sit on greta has to be determined within one year after the convention enters into force. the action plan was also adopted at the meeting in of heads of state and government leaders of the member states of the council of europe during which the coe human trafficking convention was accepted. this action plan sets out the principle tasks of the coe over the next few years. the battle against thb is mentioned under the heading strengthening the security of european subjects and is determined by the coe human trafficking convention. under the heading building a europe for children it was an nounced that a children s rights perspective will be implemented throughout the activities of the coe. in this context the three year programme building a europe for and with chil dren was launched which is designed to deal with protecting children against all forms of violence with attention to social legal health and educational dimensions. one form of violence is trafficking in and abuse of children. a new committee was set up to deal with implementation of this point the committee of experts on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and abuse pc es . this committee comes under the european com mittee on crime problems cdpc which specified the committee s tasks. one of these tasks is the drafting of a new legal and partly binding instrument to protect children against sexual exploitation and abuse. this instrument must be compatible with existing international instruments and may not include issues relating to compensation for vic tims. it must include matters such as a monitoring mechanism aspects of criminal proce dure for example how children are interviewed and the exchange of information. in for the first time in its existence the european court of human rights estab lished the existence of a violation of article of the european convention on human rights echr which sets out the prohibition against slavery servitude and forced or compulsory labour. in the case of siliadin v. france the court held that french criminal law offered inadequate protection to a girl from togo working in a french household in very poor circumstances against the servitude to which she was subjected by private individuals see also chapter . this case raised the question as to whether a member state can be held responsible by the european court of human rights for a violation of this right protected by the echr by a private individual. the court answered this ques tion in the affirmative. this is one of the reasons why the nrm has urged the minister of justice to proceed with ratification of the convention as soon as possible. cm final may . decision of the cdpc on future work of the committee of experts on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and abuse cdpc bu final july . echr july application no. . the court stated that only penal legislation could offer the intended effective and necessary protection against breaches of art. echr. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur state responsibility for violations of human rights once the court had established that the girl was in a situation of servitude as defined in article echr in the private household of a family it saw itself as being faced with the question of whether this finding might lead to a conclusion that the french state had breached the european convention on human rights. the prohibitions included in echr are aimed in the first instance at the parties to the convention and not at private individuals. however as lawson argues in his case note to the judgment a line has developed in the case law of the european court of human rights in the past years to effect that the rights incorporated in echr have a horizontal effect i.e. they also apply among and between private individuals . this conclusion is partly based on the fact that the echr assumes a positive obligation on states to adopt such measures as are necessary to ensure the effective enjoyment of human rights. as a result of the conclusion in siliadin that the parties to the convention are obliged to incorporate into their criminal law such provisions as will criminalise the conduct speci fied in article echr it is now established that the horizontal effect also applies in relation to this article. echr also imposes not only an obligation to penalise this conduct but adds that these penal provisions must also be applied in practice. the logical corollary to an obligation is a responsibility if that obligation is not fulfilled. in the echr context what this means is that failure to adequately comply with the obligation to implement and enforce legislation and regulations results in a violation by the state of its obligations under the echr. the violation results in responsibility which will usually take the form of an obligation to pay costs and damages. thus in the siliadin case the european court of human rights ordered france to pay the costs for legal assistance that had been incurred by siliadin. the court did not deal substantively with the question of whether and if so how much compensation would have to be paid as the plaintiff had not asked for any compensation. the coe embarked on the campaign to combat trafficking in human beings in the spring of . the aim of the campaign which runs until and uses the slogan human be ing not for sale is twofold. on the one hand it involves raising general awareness among governments ngos and society regarding the scale of thb in europe. on the other hand the campaign is designed to promote signature and ratification of the coe human trafficking convention by as many states as possible. the mayors and represen tatives of municipalities and local authorities from the coe member states underlined their involvement in the campaign via the congress of local and regional authorities. bos ollerman makes a more detailed analysis of the doctrine of the horizontal effect of human rights in her study of literature on the implications of a human rights based approach to thb. she approaches this from a philosophical historical perspective of human rights in which she refers to echr case law including the judgment in the case of siliadin. the court only mentioned repression here not prevention as was also confirmed by lawson in his note on the judgment. bos ollerman investigates the issue of state responsibility in cases of thb from the perspectives of both repression and prevention coinciding here with the coe human trafficking convention. resolution on the council of europe campaign to combat trafficking in human beings. the congress of local and regional authorities is an advisory body of the coe and with members represents more than european local and regional authorities thereby giving expression to the views of local democracy. legislation and regulations they prepared a declaration in which they pledged to disseminate the campaign mes sage as widely as possible and to make the subject a top priority of their administrations. in this they referred to their earlier resolution on the fight against trafficking in human beings and their sexual exploitation the role of cities and regions. . . organisation for security and co operation in europe osce the appointment in may of the osce special representative on combating traffick ing in human beings and the appointment of a special unit within the osce secretariat which in conjunction with the special representative form the anti traffic assistance unit atau to assist member states in the battle against thb were important events. the special representative presented a working plan in october to implement her task of translating the osce action plan on trafficking in human beings into practice. in this she explained how first and foremost she wanted to assist governments in the implemen tation of their obligations under the action plan by visiting the countries attending and contributing to national and international conferences on thb seeking media atten tion for the subject keeping information on thb on the osce website up to date and presenting an annual report regarding progress in the fight against thb. from the very start the special representative devoted her attention primarily to combating trafficking in children and labour exploitation paying particular attention to victims. the special representative s position meant that she could make a direct approach at government level but she had contacts with all possible partners in the chain. this occurred under the motto alliance against trafficking in persons . she obtained information on shortcom ings pitfalls and best practices directly in the field from the chain partners. the alliance expert coordination team aect was created on her initiative partly with this in mind. this involves participation by experts in the field of combating thb from international organisations such as ilo iom coe and unodc international ngos such as la strada international international federation of red cross and red crescent societies and anti slavery international and national experts such as bnrm . the aect oper ates as an independent platform where discussion can take place across the broad spec trum of thb and where the aims are the streamlining of and collaboration in measures to deal with the problem. it also serves as a matrix information source and advisory body for the special representative. in mid the special representative indicated that she declaration on the fight against trafficking in human beings appendix to resolution . resolution . workplan special representative on combating trafficking in human beings sec.gal october . an explanation of the action plan can be found in nrm . resulting in a report on the current situation in the fight against thb in the country in question with information concerning prevention detection and prosecution as well as victim support. a report of this type has appeared for most of the osce member states including the netherlands. the dutch government has released this report for publication see www.osce.org documents cthb en.pdf in contrast to almost all other countries. review of and outlook for http www.osce.org documents cthb en.pdf . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur would not be available for reappointment and her successor was appointed on octo ber . the osce parliamentary assembly pa adopted a resolution on combating trafficking in human beings at its th annual meeting. this resolution reaffirmed all of the previous opinions of the pa and called on the member states to implement earlier agreements in cluding those set out in the osce action plan the palermo protocol and the optional protocol on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography to the un conven tion on the rights of the child. the member states and the council of ministers of the osce were asked to devote specific attention to the role of the armed forces or peace missions based abroad in connection with the demand side for thb. at its th annual meeting the pa reverted to this topic in a resolution on combating in volvement in trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation and abuse by international peacekeeping forces. proceeding on the assumption that the demand for commercial sex ual services forms a breeding ground for thb the pa considered that measures were re quired to prevent and counter armed forces and civilian support staff involved in interna tional peace missions as well as employees of international organisations from making any contribution to the demand side of thb. the member states were called on to take measures for this purpose in the form of primary and subordinate legislation codes of conduct and awareness campaigns the permanent council of the osce decided during its nd plenary meeting to add an addendum to the osce action plan to combat trafficking in human beings addressing the spe cial needs of child victims of trafficking for protection and assistance. this contains recom mendations to the member states as to how to deal with trafficking in children. the rec ommendations include criminalising trafficking in children prevention and assistance and protection focusing specifically on children. also research should be facilitated and training should be provided on how to recognise underage victims of thb. . points of attention and bottlenecks this chapter describes developments in the area of legislation and regulations since the ap pearance of the previous comprehensive report nrm . what follow here are points of attention and bottlenecks that merit repeated mention. edinburgh from to july . descriptions of these documents are contained in nrm chapter . the council of ministers was however unable to reach agreement during its th meeting in sofia on december on a resolution ensuring that international forces and missions contribute to preventing and combating trafficking in human beings proposed in pursuance of this call from the pa. washington dc july . osce pa sc e. pc.dec july pc journal no. . legislation and regulations human trafficking provision article f criminal code is a very extensive and complex provision because the choice was made to have a single provision on thb criminalising a large number of courses of conduct of disparate natures. the complicated wording leads to problems of interpreta tion. this is partly because of the use of a number of expressions from international legis lation which are not explained by the dutch legislator in detail. the exact definition of the key expression exploitation as regards labour and services outside the sex industry has been left to the courts. it is remarkable that the thb article does not criminalise the act of forcing someone to hand over income from non sexual labour or services although forcing someone to provide proceeds derived from voluntary sexual transactions or organ removal is crimi nalised under article f criminal code. the maximum sentence of six years for thb without aggravating circumstances is rela tively low. the level of the potential sentence has consequences for the possibility of pre trial detention which may be undesirable bearing in mind that thb is so obviously a shocking breach of public order. other national primary and subordinate legislation while there was a promise as far back as that the general prohibition on issuing work permits for prostitutes from outside the eu would be abolished within the foresee able future this prohibition is still in force. the distinction between a report of an offence and a statement relevant under the crimi nal law is impractical in the context of the rules under migration law as far as victims of thb are involved. in accordance with the new rules for continued residence after the expiry of the b con tained in chapter b of the aliens act implementation guidelines a victim has to apply for a continued residence permit and is required to demonstrate his or her eligibility for it by handing over a copy of the court verdict in the criminal case as evidence. the victim however is not a party to that case and will not therefore automatically have a copy of the verdict. the new rules on continued residence only mentions victims who have reported the of fence while witnesses or victim witnesses who cooperate in the investigation and prose cution also run the risk of reprisals if their cooperation has contributed towards the con viction of the trafficker. in accordance with the amended criteria it is important for continued residence after the b regulation whether or not a conviction resulted from the thb prosecution. the amended criteria appear to imply that a conviction for thb is required. there are how ever other situations where the results of the criminal proceedings must lead to the as sumption that the law has established that repatriating the victim would involve risks. while the second ground in the new rules for continued residence is intended to make the length of the victim s residence the most important humanitarian factor to be considered trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the fact that the wording proceeds on the basis of the date of conviction in the criminal case does not prevent victims who have cooperated in the investigation and prosecution depending on the length of the criminal proceedings from being kept in uncertainty about their continued resident status in the netherlands for more than three years. international despite medium term policy documents such as the eu action plan on human trafficking eu presidencies dealing with thb are not adequately building on the work of their predecessors. the eu action plan on human trafficking excels principally in its many proposals for in ternational conferences on the subject. these do not however contribute towards a more effective approach to combat thb. while the same terminological framework is increasingly being used at an international level the terms thb and exploitation are still interpreted in various ways. in light of the judgment of the european court of human rights in the case of siliadin v. france and numerous international documents it has been established internationally that thb constitutes a violation of human rights. at the european level the campaign against thb is placed to a significant extent within the context of combating illegal immigration. it is possible however in practice for there to be a degree of tension between these two aims. victims and victim support . introduction this chapter contains information about victims of trafficking in human beings thb and the support available for them. . victims . . some specific risk groups minors children the third bnrm report devoted considerable attention to minors as a specific group of vic tims of thb. it indicated that the traffic in children was not just a remote phenomenon and also that it was not easy to obtain reliable information on the subject. a joint study by ecpat netherlands defence for children international dci and unicef netherlands into the exploitation of children in the netherlands provided greater clarification on who the possible victims of exploitation were and where and how they were exploited. using file research interviews with workers at institutions and peer re search a database containing information on victims was set up. while exploitation as defined in article f of the dutch criminal code was not established in all of the docu mented cases and while many of the cases lacked relevant information the research pro vides an alarming picture of what can happen to underage children in the netherlands. some results from an insight into exploitation of the cases involved exploitation in prostitution with cases involving other forms of exploitation and cases involving a combination of the two. exploitation in prostitution most underage victims of exploitation in prostitution were between the ages of and they came from countries more than of these victims were of native or non native dutch origin were dutch nation als and resided illegally in the netherlands by far the majority of victims were girls factors rendering underage children vulnerable to exploitation in prostitution emotional depend ence and each of these applicable in more than of the cases lack of papers and family cir former victims interviewed other victims and former victims. these were minor children who suffered exploitation between . age was not known for of the victims. the country of origin was not known for of the victims. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur cumstances e.g. broken families deceased parents domestic rows . also each applying to between and of the cases threats by loverboys pimps or family members and financial reasons. other factors increasing vulnerability applicable in less than of the cases drug addiction sexual abuse and homelessness. other forms of exploitation the other forms of exploitation related principally to illegal adoption and domestic work but also included the transportation of drugs cleaning work deception by offering a football con tract and exploitation in the catering sector each applicable in of the cases and exploita tion in crime in small businesses and taking the form of arranged marriages each applicable in of the cases there was a relatively high proportion of young children below the age of among underage victims of other forms of exploitation the illegally adopted children. for to year olds the exploitation centred around domestic work cleaning work and the catering sector the proportion of young males affected by this form of exploitation was larger than for exploitation in prostitution at . of the victims were girls the victims came from countries only were dutch nationals and a large proportion resided in the netherlands illegally factors rendering underage children vulnerable to other forms of exploitation family circumstances lack of papers and emotional dependence . in addition with each applicable to be tween of the cases financial reasons homelessness and threats from family members or through blackmail with pornographic pictures of the minors and in of the cases sexual abuse. other factors that increased vulnerability such as age in cases involving illegal adoption and smug gling drugs in babies nappies were involved in of the cases. source van den borne kloosterboer . what the researchers said was that the legislature should clarify which forms of exploitation of underage children were contemplated by the thb article. in order to obtain a national picture of the nature and scale of the problem information should be recorded in a uniform clear and complete manner and should be distributed among all of the partners in the chain. information and training should result in improved prevention identification reception and support for victims as well as better detection and prosecution of suspects. victims who are minors should obtain a residence permit on humanitarian grounds and the international co operation between the various institutions should be improved according to the researchers. underage children who have a slight intellectual impairment are particularly vulnerable to exploitation. there are indications that the recruitment activities of loverboys see . in clude girls with a slight intellectual impairment. individuals who have any such impairment are not only vulnerable to exploitation in the sex industry but also to exploitation in other sectors. the african youngsters in question had paid for their trip and were then left to their own fate at schiphol airport. gender was unknown for of the victims. the country of origin was not known for of the victims. victims and victim support former unaccompanied underage asylum seekers amas in the third report attention was paid to the following topics the fact that some unaccom panied underage asylum seekers amas are brought to the netherlands with a view to ex ploitation in prostitution the situation in the reception centres which is not a safe one in every respect e.g. brouns et al. and the risks associated with the policy on amas. this policy means that anyone arriving in the netherlands at the age of or above and who has not been acknowledged as a refugee must leave the country when they turn . when this policy was finalised there were comments from various quarters that there was a sig nificant likelihood that many of the youngsters concerned would prefer illegal residence over repatriation to their country of origin with all of the consequences this entailed includ ing exploitation e.g. alien affairs advisory committee ecpat council for the application of criminal law . these concerns appear to have been well founded. the purpose of the ama campus in vught focusing on repatriation was not achieved. of the amas placed there only six returned to their countries of origin with most leaving for destinations unknown klaassen and de prez . the campus was closed and the re ception houses for repatriated amas in angola opened in and the democratic re public of congo opened in scarcely received any youngsters from this target group. the youth care inspectorate also confirmed that not many amas were working towards repatriation and that some were ending up becoming illegals. according to the evaluation by klaassen and de prez one important learning point is that a more individualis tic approach to amas offers a better basis for increasing their motivation to return than the group oriented approach taken at the campus. an experiment was undertaken at one of the ama sites in in the context of the project the fight against human trafficking with very intensive support for amas at risk which took the form of constantly following the amas in question. this went well in the sense that the amas concerned did not disappear but it was extremely time consuming and probably only temporarily effective so that hiemstra and hurkens b did not recommend it as a national approach. in the policy rules on terminating the provision of living allowances came into effect the project for terminating allowances for former amas plexa . plexa had a major influence on the situation of former amas. according to samah the national interest organisation for young asylum seekers some of the youngsters left for their country of origin often with support from the international organisation for migration iom but most opted at least in the first instance to stay here illegally annual report . the response from the logo to plexa and letters from municipal authorities in an opinion dated march on progress with and implementation of the policy note unaccompanied minor asylum seekers. national consultative body for municipal administrations on reception and return policy landelijk overleg gemeentebesturen opvang . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur also referred to the approach developed in utrecht offering greater prospects and which has since been followed up in many municipalities. there has been a great deal of commotion during the past two years concerning the disap pearance of amas for unknown destinations and the fact that they might be ending up as victims of exploitation. these are mostly amas who are being obliged to leave often after a few years of legal residence but also include some who had only been in the netherlands for a short period. the problem concerning amas leaving for unknown destinations had been known about for some time see e.g. rijken and led the organisations in the immigra tion chain to set up the protocol vermissing ama protocol on missing amas in . the protocol on missing amas the protocol contains guidelines to prevent amas from going missing and to deal with any missing persons situation involving amas that still occur. with respect to the process of dealing with missing persons the protocol involved arrangements about which chain partner should undertake which ac tion during a particular timescale. it quickly became clear however that the protocol was not being used by the chain partners and sometimes was not even known. nor was it clear who was in charge of the protocol which was also felt to be very complex and extensive see also kromhout and leijstra . there was confusion about who should report missing persons missing amas were not al ways reported and the police were not always prepared to record reports of a criminal offence. the protocol is being adjusted. the frequency of departure for unknown destinations from reception facilities gave rise to a study by the scientific research and documentation centre wodc into repatriation and departure for unknown destinations among to year old amas who had not yet ob tained a residence permit. the research showed that the numbers of amas in the nether lands leaving for unknown destinations amounted to in and in repre senting and respectively of all departing amas kromhout and leijstra . kromhout and leijstra interviewed amas in relation to their views on repatriation and illegal residence. most of the interviewees were negative about repatriation. eleven of the youngsters disapproved of the idea of living as an illegal and six of them felt that living as an illegal was in any event better than repatriation. the position was not clear for three of the youngsters. the additional measures to the nam include a proposal for raising awareness among organi sations working with youngsters about indications of thb so that they can recognise ex dozens of chinese and indian amas disappeared from reception. there are signs that some are being exploited. nigerian girls also disappear. the police the people smuggling information and analysis centre iam kmar ind coa and the de opbouw foundation now nidos . the former reception centre valentijn and the beatrixoord reception centre were also involved in its preparation cd rom protocol vermissing ama . departure for an unknown destination is not always a source of concern support staff are sometimes aware that an ama has gone to family abroad and sometimes there has even been contact after the ama has left. letter from the minister for immigration and integration to the lower house dated december . victims and victim support ploitation of minors at an early stage. another development in this context is that the exper tise centre on thb and people smuggling emm is attempting to record indications of amas who might be victims of exploitation or who might be at risk of becoming victims. emm is collaborating on this with ind coa blinn foundation against trafficking in women stichting tegen vrouwenhandel stv and the dutch council for refugees vluchtelingenwerk nederland . further measures being taken to improve the safety of this group of minors include hour supervision and support at the reception sites and the tak ing of fingerprints at the start of the procedure. it should also soon be possible to arrange the custody for these minors within hours letter from the minister for immigration inte gration to the lower house dated december . in the same letter the minister an nounced a pilot study on secure reception and possibly also electronic supervision for amas who are subject to a significant risk of disappearing at that point amas from india and nigeria . in the loverboy project in zwolle there were actually few questions about prevention in re lation to amas kool but of the victims of exploitation in prostitution in the research carried out by van den borne and kloosterboer were amas. while no cases of ex ploitation in sectors other than the sex industry were found either in this research or the bnrm research into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry see chapter it is nonetheless important for organisations to remain alert to the possibility of male and fe male amas being vulnerable to exploitation in the sex industry or elsewhere. asylum seekers the research by brouns et al. into the safety of women and girls in central asylum re ception central agency for the reception of asylum seekers coa resulted in a range of measures such as adaptations to the physical environment policy measures designed to in crease manageability in the sites adjustment of house rules development of a protocol for dealing with discrimination intimidation and violence training in order to increase women s powers of resistance and training of the staff aimed at identifying unsafe situations. the combating trafficking in human beings project started in with the aim of investigat ing whether and how the central agency for the reception of asylum seekers coa might prevent trafficking in human beings and prostitution and also develop and imple ment policy. secure reception actually started at the end of in the form of the hour supervision and support mentioned earlier. the ind is working on the development of risk profiles to allow earlier and more systematic recognition of risk groups. amas were classified as a risk group at the start of the project. van den borne and kloosterboer do in fact point out that the status of many victims is unknown. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the coa project combating thb some conclusions residents can live fairly anonymously in the reception centres and visitors have fairly easy access. once in a while residents undertake prostitution activities on site the current registration system for reporting incidents is not suited for registering soft information suspicions and signs . there is no link between information from the temporary aliens emergency facilities tijdelijke noodvoorziening vreemdelingen tnv and regular reception facilities. any po tentially relevant information at the earliest stages of reception concerning prostitution anxious be haviour crime is therefore lost the coa s internal facilities for enforcing the regime are confined to retention of spending money and temporary removal from the centre. these facilities will have no effect in relation to any signs of thb unaccompanied underage asylum seekers who leave for an unknown destination are reported as missing. the same does not apply to adults the contacts between the coa and local police and aliens police are generally good although feed back from the police could be improved recommendations for increasing safety at reception centres increase the knowledge and skills of coa staff in relation to thb develop a vision on combating thb and prostitution and translate this into practical implemen tation strengthen the process of identifying registering and reporting report any signs to the correct inves tigation services and to a central reporting point within the coa develop an approach for identifying potential victims of thb using risk profiles and follow and support them from the time of their arrival improve the cooperative approach and information exchange particularly cooperation with the po lice the public prosecution service the royal netherlands marechaussee kmar and the ind. the coa has decided to extend the combating trafficking in human beings project and to regard it as the foundation for the safety reporting point within the reception directorate of the coa which is to be set up in . victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry it is widely known that victims of exploitation in the sex industry are reluctant to come for ward with their experiences. this also applies however to victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. they do not always view themselves as victims but the problem can also relate to the fact that their residence or employment status might be illegal they might fear being deported or fear that their statements might have adverse consequences for their colleagues who might also be working illegally the fact that the situation in their country of origin might be even worse or the build up of debts. threats can also play their these coa facilities are occupied by asylum seekers who cannot immediately be interviewed by the ind after they report to the application centre. victims and victim support part in some situations of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and the victims of this type of exploitation may also be ashamed of the situation in which they have landed. . . victims in numbers stv victim registration one of the tasks of the foundation against trafficking in women stichting tegen vrouwen handel stv is to register suspected victims of thb. this means that all bodies who are or think they might be dealing with a victim for example the police or social services but also concerned citizens can report this to the stv where this is recorded.nrm the police are obliged to report any cases they encounter. others will often submit reports because the stv is able to do something for them such as the indirect organisation of reception or other facilities for the victim or the provision of expert advice. not every victim is reported and the stv does not know everything about every victim who is reported. for instance more is often known about victims placed in reception facilities than about victims reported by concerned citizens with whom the stv has no further involvement. it also happens that after they are reported clients disappear from view and files become spread out across a range of organisations stv annual report . the stv does not have the capacity to retrieve this information. it is also impossible to exclude the possibility of duplication cer tainly where information is limited. this section contains information on the victims registered by the stv following a dip in the numbers have been increasing in recent years. in there were and in . the information covers some basic background factors for the victims such as coun try of origin age and gender. we go on to present so far as possible and relevant more de tailed background information for . the information in this section is based partly on the stv annual reports and partly on the files provided by the stv. this has minor consequences for the number of registered possible victims we present for . an attempt is made to collect any missing information as far as possible for the thb victim monitor see later in this chapter . according to provisional stv data for there were in that year. more of this information was available for than previously for the first time. there is an indication below the tables as to whether they are based on secondary analyses of the data files or the stv s annual reports. the stv annual reports contain figures of reports for and the secondary file analyses by bnrm on a file updated by the stv disclose a figure of for the same year. in this section the figure of will be shown for the results of the secondary analyses and the figure of where we fall back on the stv annual reports. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur table . shows the annual ranking order for the five most common countries of origin for victims. table . major countries of origin of victims showing annual rankings country total brazil bulgaria czech republic netherlands nigeria romania russian federation ukraine source stv files . in and the netherlands was the most common country of origin for victims of thb. bulgaria fell to second place with nigeria and romania changing places in positions three and four. table . shows the most common nationalities of the victims who were reported to the stv. appendix table b . contains a full overview of all nationalities in alphabetical order. table . most important countries of origin of possible victims registered with the stv per annum country total n n n n n n angola brazil bulgaria cameroon china czech republic hungary lithuania moldova morocco the most recent year determines the sequence in which the countries are mentioned in the table. based on the nationality of possible victims. provisional figures from the stv up to august show that china is in the ascendant as a significant country of origin stv nieuws a nationality is included if at least victims were of that nationality in the period from to or at least victims in . victims and victim support country total n n n n n n netherlands nigeria poland romania russian federation sierra leone slovakia ukraine former yugoslavia other unknown total source stv files . there was a marked increase in the number and proportion of dutch national victims in and . the number and proportion of bulgarian nigerian and romanian victims was high as in previous years. the number of moroccan and turkish victims increased. table . shows the age allocation of the victims reported to the stv in the period from to . table . age distribution of victims reported to the stv per annum age category total n n n n n n years years years years years years and older unknown total source stv annual reports . as in previous years most of the victims in and were in the age bracket from to . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the new victims reported in included two men. they were both being exploited in prostitution. one man or boy was reported in and none in . more detailed background information on victims out of the clients who were registered in it is known that at least had children had a mental healthcare issue had none unknown used drugs did not unknown were pregnant were not unknown were also victims of exploitation in sectors other than that of prostitution were not unknown were also working in prostitution from home were not unknown source stv files . the figures mentioned above must be considered to be a minimum because of the signifi cant gaps in information. of the victims registered with the stv in took advantage of the period for reflection. the figure was also in . for both years this represents about of the foreign vic tims. as in previous years the police were by far the most significant reporters of victims in followed at some distance by the reception facilities. ind registration of victims on the b regulation bnrm asks the ind each year how many possible victims and witnesses of thb are rely ing on the b regulation and obtain a temporary residence permit on this basis. it has been decided to report on this issue in the current report from onwards. where relevant comparisons are drawn with the period for which reliable b information is available to .nrm it is important to state that the information relates to victims of thb illegally residing in the netherlands and who are cooperating or want to cooperate with the police and public prosecution service occasionally children of victims and children of witnesses are erroneously registered as b applicants not every b application is dealt with in the year of application. source verbal information from the stv. thirty clients had their children with them in the netherlands the children of clients stayed in the country of origin and for the others it was not known where their children were source stv annual report . in catering housekeeping or as au pairs. of the victims in were not dutch nationals and the corresponding figure for was . victims and victim support reference is made to appendix for the research details and some additional comments. in the ind received applications under the b regulation. this figure was much lower than in and when there were and applications respectively. the figures in those years were admittedly much higher than in previous years. the ind issued b permits in . the corresponding number for and was again higher and in the years before that lower. stv registration of b applications the stv registered b applications for therefore fewer than the ind. apparently not eve ryone who makes a b application also reports to the stv or perhaps the stv registration is incom plete on this point. stv does distinguish between victim applicants and witness applicants out of applicants regis tered by the stv were victims and were witnesses . these proportions were almost identical in the previous year. information from the ind which has not been analysed in any greater detail indicates that the number of b applications and awards was much higher in . the figures for were b applications and permits. table . shows the age allocation of victims witnesses applying for obtaining a b permit in . table . age distribution of persons with a b permit application age category application permit granted n n years years years years years years and older total almost half of the individuals who applied for or were granted a b permit were between the ages of and . nearly one third of them were in the age range between and . the applicants included seven minors. the two youngest children were probably the children of victims. this was not the case however for the five children in the age bracket between and . they had their own files and were not associated with other individuals. of the applicants had already made contact with the ind for example in relation to an asylum application. the stv records indicate that of applicants were victims and were witnesses in . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur virtually all of the b applicants in were female. the applicants included males . one of these males was years old and probably the child of a victim see above . the percentage of male applicants was also low in and earlier years. of those who actually attained a b residence permit were female and were male. table . contains an overview of the most common nationalities of victims and witnesses holding or applying for a b permit. a table specifying all nationalities is included in appendix table b . . table . nationality of persons with a b permit application nationality application permit granted n n bulgarian sierra leonese romanian nigerian russian other unknown total in one in six of the victims witnesses of thb applying for a b residence permit were bulgarian nationals. this means that just as in and earlier years bulgaria topped the list of countries of origin for victims and witnesses in the b . sierra leone took second place in followed by romania nigeria and the russian federation. table . shows an allocation of the victims witnesses applying for or holding a b accord ing to region of origin. it also draws a distinction within europe where many victims come from between those countries who were members of the eu in countries that be came members of the eu in or who were candidate members at that point and became members in non eu countries in eastern europe and non eu countries in west ern europe. continents are also distinguished. percentage of males each year and . women and one man. percentage of males in earlier years and . a nationality is included in the table if or more of the victims witnesses have the nationality in question. it may appear strange that more b permits were granted to than applied for by victims witnesses of sierra leonese nationality. however this is possible because not all applications are dealt with within the same year. it probably concerns persons who arrived in the netherlands as undocumented asylum seekers and whose na tionality was later established. belgium germany france italy luxembourg the netherlands denmark the republic of ireland the united kingdom greece portugal spain finland austria sweden. cyprus estonia hungary latvia lithuania malta poland slovenia slovakia the czech republic bulgaria and romania. victims and victim support table . region of origin of persons with a b permit application region of origin application permit granted n n eu eu new member accession states eastern europe non eu member states western europe non eu member states africa latin america caribbean asia unknown total the majority of the victims and witnesses who applied for a b residence permit or were is sued with one came from countries that had joined the eu in and africa and non eu countries in eastern europe. the police report victims and witnesses of thb who are eligible for a temporary residence permit based on the b regulation to the ind. the ind issues the residence permits. many victims and witnesses wish to stay in the netherlands after the b permit has ex pired.nrm the ind has manually recorded for just over a year how many victims witnesses submitted an application for continued residence and how many of these applications are granted. in the ind noted applications for continued residence with equal num bers being approved and rejected and at first instance. . facilities available to victims . . general developments and facilities reporting a criminal offence the third bnrm report commented that it was not always easy for victims of trafficking to report the criminal offence. one of the recommendations in that report therefore was that victims of thb should be offered a clear opportunity to do so as quickly as possible. the na tional ombudsman has now confirmed that investigation officials are obliged in principle to the russian federation moldavia ukraine belarus albania bosnia herzegovina serbia macedonia croatia montenegro kazakhstan turkey kyrgyzstan. switzerland norway iceland the isle of man the faroe islands andorra gibraltar the vatican city san marino lichtenstein monaco. only included in the table if individuals applying for or holding a b come from there. source verbal information from the ind. we do not know how many victims made an objection or the results of any such objections. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur register any reports of a criminal offence in terms of article of the code of criminal procedure. only one exception to this general rule is available according to the ombuds man namely if it can be established in advance without any further investigation and with out a shadow of doubt that the conduct which is the subject of the report does not amount to an offence. the general rule that a report of a criminal offence must be registered even applies in cases where there might then be a suspicion that the person wanting to report the crime is primarily concerned with the consequences of the report in terms of residency status. the national ombudsman has indicated that neither investigation into the reliability of the individual wishing to report the crime nor any assessment of whether sufficient evi dence can be gathered should play any part at that stage. improvements in the application of the b regulation we indicated in chapter that improvements were required not only in the b regulation but also in its application. this requires input from all parties involved in the implementa tion of the b regulation and constant attention to the dissemination of knowledge about the regulation. b conference and adjustments to application of the b regulation following up on a promise during the general consultation on thb on january the minister for immigration integration in conjunction with the ind stv and bnrm organised the working conference entitled uitvoering b regeling b regulation implementation . the aim of this confer ence was to achieve improved implementation of the regulation without the need for any adjustment to the regulation itself. the meeting resulted in a range of concrete actions a broadly composed editorial board was set up to arrange for the dissemination of current and clear information on the regulation the foundations were laid for the safety file an initiative to assist victims of thb to collect facts and circumstances that might be relevant in connection with the assessment of their applications for con tinued residence after the b in response to the conference the legal aid board raad voor de rechtsbijstand extended the number of hours of legal assistance that could be obtained by a victim of thb for assistance in the proceed ings the ministry of foreign affairs prepared thematic official notices on thb for a number of coun tries the conference resulted in a structural consultation between the chain partners on the implementa tion of the b regulation and associated matters the stv platform. report dated august . conference held on june in the hague. these official notices currently available for romania the russian federation bulgaria and the ukraine contain a description of the approach to thb reception of and support for victims and the way in which prostitution is regarded in the countries in question. the general official notice for nigeria also dealt with these subjects. victims and victim support in the stv platform a large number of chain partners exchange information on bottlenecks in the implementation of the b regulation on a regular basis. the broad composition of this consultative body generally allows for a solution to be achieved smoothly even though some of the bottlenecks are obstinate ones. for example in certain regions it still happens that victims and their lawyers are not informed by the public prosecution service about the progress of their criminal case it often takes a long time for b passes to be issued and municipalities have adopted divergent policies in relation to victims being allowed to work. the moment when the b regulation is offered remains another obstinate bottle neck. the moment when the b regulation is offered in current practice it is unclear exactly when a possible victim should be made aware of the existence of the b regulation. this is of primary significance when detention of a foreign national is being con sidered because of illegal residence. according to the regulation the police ought to inform the foreign national about the possibility of reporting the crime of thb as soon as there is the slightest indication of this crime. this wording leaves little scope for interpretation about the time when the b should be offered to a possible victim or witness of thb. the council of state held that the fact that it was known at the time of taking into aliens detention that the appellant was encountered in the con text of an investigation into thb and people smuggling does not detract from the legitimacy of the measure aliens detention since a foreign national may also be detained in such circumstances. the council of state held that because the conditions for taking the individual into aliens detention for the purpose of deportation were met this was enough to render such a detention legitimate whether the foreign national was a possible victim of thb or not. this opinion from the council of state is difficult to reconcile with the text and even more so with the spirit of the b regulation. through the b regulation the dutch government is in part imple menting the provisions for the benefit of victims of thb as contained in the palermo protocol article . there is no doubt in the b regulation about the point when the reflection period should be of fered. nor does the regulation leave much scope on the way in which this reflection period should be used the reflection period is intended for reflecting on a decision to report the crime in complete peace . staying in a detention facility is not particularly conducive to this. the prime consideration is that victims of thb need protection by the government and this should not be limited to just being a paper exercise. victims of thb in aliens detention in blinn initiated a study into female victims of thb in aliens detention. victims of thb who do not leave the netherlands voluntarily sometimes end up in aliens detention. it is not known exactly how often this happens but stv and blinn were aware of cases of suspected victims of thb in aliens detention in and . these cases were studied this is in conflict with the victim care instruction aanwijzing slachtofferzorg dated june . it is a pity that the association of dutch municipalities vng does not take part in the consultation. council of state administrative judiciary division june . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur in the context of the blinn research. there was also a study of the literature interviews were held and a round table meeting was organised in relation to the results. findings of the investigation into female victims of thb in aliens detention bottlenecks that were identified failure to recognise victims of thb in the phase prior to aliens detention victims in the asylum procedure run the risk of not being believed if they do not quickly tell their tale about being victims of thb failure to recognise victims of thb during aliens detention knowledge and experience are lost be cause of the frequent changes of location and staff. the employees of the private security companies used for supervision are not aware of the position of foreign nationals in detention and are unable to identify thb problems with legal assistance from duty lawyers. action has since been taken towards improving this area voluntary repatriation is difficult from aliens detention making it difficult to return via iom and to obtain the iom living allowance communication between the aliens police ind and the detention centre officials dealing with repa triation is not always what it should be. sometimes the wheels can be set in motion for returning someone in conjunction with an outside organisation and the possible victims are unexpectedly re leased and then they disappear from the view of the social services the recording of victims of thb is only sporadic and the various recording systems are incompati ble the organisations involved are not sufficiently aware of the existing support that is available. recommendations in a broad sense priority and attention for identifying victims of thb training and additional education of duty lawyers as regards identification of thb and knowledge of the b regulation concentrate the expertise by bringing female foreign nationals together at a set location with expert staff rather than having them mixed in with other detainees under the criminal law voluntary repatriation including support from iom has to be possible institutions should have a duty to report on the presence of victims of thb and on what has hap pened to them. there have now been improvements in identifying victims of thb in aliens detention and more attention is being paid to this group. in the ministry of justice initiated several consultations with representatives from the police ind stv iom and blinn looking for with the police ind the judicial institutions policy service legal aid outside organisations and a single thb victim. the officials dealing with returns explain the procedures provide information make practical arrangements act as conduits for the ind and the aliens police and try to persuade foreign nationals to return to their countries of origin. a very limited initial straw poll among penal institutions clearly showed that their populations were actually quite likely to include victims of thb albeit not regularly. victims and victim support solutions to bottlenecks in the area of identifying and supporting these possible victims. blinn had contacts with victims or possible victims females and males in aliens detention in of whom officially reported the offence to the police and ended up on the b regulation. quality of legal aid given to foreign nationals in aliens detention facilities complaints about the quality of legal aid given to foreign nationals in aliens detention led to the legal aid boards setting up a national investigation into the subject. quality of legal aid given to foreign nationals in aliens detention facilities an investigation the researchers jacobs bruinsma and van haaf reported that by no means all of the foreign nationals appeared to have had a visit from a lawyer at the first stage. during the detention phase communication between the foreign national and the lawyer is generally in writing it seems that pro viders of legal aid seldom visit detention facilities. it is not at all unusual for there to be no lawyer pre sent at hearings certainly if there are continued pleas. those who actually do attend are not always ex pert. estimates from the aliens courts indicate that the number of poor performers ranges between with a core at around . the group of outstanding lawyers with sound knowledge of relevant and recent case law is about the same size. while the research was not dealing with victims of thb these were among the foreign nationals in aliens detention and the recommendations also ap ply to legal aid for them. the researchers recommend that the legal aid board should take a more proactive and stricter stance on these points. the remuneration of legal aid providers should depend on their appearance at the hearing and their visits to the client and they should undertake follow up courses on the law relating to aliens detention every so often. in light of the possibility of encountering victims of thb this should also include training and instruction in the areas of identifying thb and knowledge of the b regulation see the above mentioned recommendations from blinn . the re searchers concluded with a recommendation to introduce consultation facilities for foreign nationals in aliens detention. proposed measures with effect from the boards will be imposing higher and uniform expertise requirements to lawyers for example as regards periodical follow up courses the question of whether it is possible to develop internal monitoring and intra professional testing will be looked into work will be undertaken on consultation facilities and a complaints scheme the boards will investigate how to introduce better incentives into the payment structure for appear ances at the first plea hearing. legal aid for victims of thb social workers and lawyers have an important part to play in providing legal assistance for possible victims of thb irrespective of the sector in which the exploitation took place. they must be in a position to explain to the possible victims their rights and possibilities and thus arrangements were made to train the return organisation terugkeerorganisatie the division of the ministry of justice responsible for immigrants in aliens detention. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur to ensure that those individuals who are eligible actually end up on the b path and can make use of the associated facilities. during and the stv was active in training care coordinators and staff in recep tion centres on the b regulation and on the legal process applicable to victims. informa tion on the b can be found on the stv website and on a site specific to the b regula tion. the regional support networks use the victim support bureau bureau slachtoffer hulp or specialist lawyers to provide legal support for foreign victims. this works well but there are not many specialist lawyers and one of the problems is that they are generally un der considerable time pressure. attempts are being made to circumvent this in utrecht am sterdam the hague and occasionally elsewhere by working in collaboration with blinn with voluntary legal support. the post graduate legal studies institute osr arranged courses on legal assistance for vic tims of thb in and . the care coordinators were made aware of which law yers in their region had taken the course stv annual report stv working plan . compensation possibilities for victims there are various ways in which victims of thb can obtain compensation. this may involve tangible losses for example property medical costs or loss of income and intangible losses for example damages for pain and suffering. victims can join a claim for civil damages as adversely affected parties in the criminal procedure the victim s civil claim is then dealt with at the same time as the criminal case. the benefit of this as opposed to proceedings before the civil court is that it is easier to submit the claim. procedure to join the criminal proceedings as an adversely affected party a summons must have been issued to a suspect before a motion for joinder of a party can be submitted in the proceedings. the public prosecutor then asks the court during the criminal proceedings to de cide on the award of compensation. the victim does not therefore need to initiate any separate pro ceedings and there are no costs for the victim in relation to this joinder procedure. the claim which is based on civil law can be lodged by anyone who has directly sustained loss as a result of a criminal of fence. when awarding compensation the court must bear in mind whatever facts have been found proven in the case. in order to join the criminal proceedings the victim must provide details on a motion for joinder of parties form concerning the loss that has been sustained and with some sub stantiation the amount that is involved. the victim has to establish the likelihood of loss rather than prove it. the victim does not need to turn up at the hearing although this can be www.fo stvkennisnet.nl. www.b regeling.nl. the other conditions are the victim has sustained loss as a result of a criminal offence the loss or part of it has not been compensated in any other way and the suspect must be summoned for the offence from which the loss arose. the loss need not be specified in the criminal charge. the victim can also submit his or her claim verbally at the hearing right up until the prosecutor holds his or her closing speech. victims and victim support desirable for example to provide an explanation if the claim is unclear. if the suspect is ac quitted then the claim is rejected. the claim will also be rejected if it is clearly unfounded. if the claim is apparently not straightforward then the claim may be declared inadmissible with a rider that the victim can lodge the claim with the civil courts. the criminal court can also award part of the claim and declare the balance to be inadmissible. if either the accused or the public prosecutor submits an appeal then by law the addition of the disadvantaged party continues through the appeal. if the suspect is convicted but the claim is rejected then the disadvantaged party cannot subsequently resort to the civil courts with the same claim. an independent appeal against rejection of the claim is however possible. if the criminal court has awarded part or all of the disadvantaged party s claim then that party acquires a title for execution once the options for appealing the judgment have been exhausted. the disadvantaged party can approach the convicted party directly for payment. forcible execution occurs in the same way as for judgments from the civil courts the credi tor passes the judgment to a bailiff who serves the judgment on the convicted party and is sues a demand for payment. if payment is not made then the bailiff can impose an attach ment on property belonging to the convicted party which is then liquidated. the execution of the judgment requires no personal contact between the victim and perpetrator. the bail iff s costs can be recovered from the perpetrator. the compensation order in addition to awarding the civil claim the court can also impose an order for compensa tion. the victim can ask for such a sanction but it can also be imposed ex proprio motu. the most important distinction between this and a claim as a disadvantaged party is that collect ing the claim is taken out of the victim s hands and passed to the central judicial collection agency. as with a civil claim the amount involved must be established as a loss in terms of civil law. when imposing a sanction of compensation the court specifies an alternative pe riod of detention in the event that the claim is not paid and recovered in full which puts ex tra pressure on the convicted party to pay up. the convicted party is not however relieved of his obligation to pay the victim just because he sits out the alternative period of detention. these are the reasons why victims may prefer compensation sanctions. in fact usually when a civil claim is awarded an order for restitution is imposed for the same amount of loss even if it is not asked for by the disadvantaged party and is not demanded by the public prosecutor. when passing a suspended sentence a court can impose a special condition to the effect that the ac cused should pay a specific amount to the victim not much use has been made of this facility since the compensation sanction was intro duced. there is no need for the victim to have joined the criminal proceedings as a disadvan taged party before any such special condition can be imposed. when passing sentence the court can impose a special condition of payment of a sum to the violent offences compensation fund schadefonds geweldsmisdrijven or some other insti the procedure of joining a claim is a civil procedure embedded in the criminal proceedings while the compensation order is a sanction. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur tution protecting the interests of victims of criminal offences. this condition is primarily of interest if there is no demonstrable victim or if a victim does not wish to obtain compensation. victims can obtain a benefit payment from the violent offences compensation fund the fund can pay out benefits to anyone who has sustained serious physical or mental in jury as a result of an intentional violent offence committed in the netherlands. this fund cannot reimburse losses resulting from lost income. in order to obtain a payment it is neces sary to lodge an application for a benefit payment with the fund. the committee deciding on applications can call for further information and can also interview witnesses and ex perts. a claim can be awarded or rejected either in whole or in part. if it is rejected then the disadvantaged party can lodge an appeal to the court of appeal in the hague. the com pensation fund has maximum benefit payment amounts and can make supplementary payments. it makes no difference to the compensation fund whether the victim is a dutch national. the offence must have been committed on dutch territory however. very few foreign victims actually find their way to the fund each year. the european commission wants it to be possible for victims to submit a claim from their own eu country to the com pensation fund in another country if the losses were sustained in that other country. a di rective to this effect came into operation on january . most foreign victims of thb come from countries outside the eu however. loss mediation loss mediators have been appointed within the police and all of the local public prosecutors offices who can try to organise a compensation arrangement between the victim and the suspect. in light of the nature of the offence however a scheme such as this does not appear to be entirely appropriate in the case of thb. victims can resort to the civil courts a conviction in a criminal case provides important evidence at the civil court the victim can exhibit the criminal conviction. if the conviction has not yet become irrevocable or if it ended in acquittal or dismissal it still does not prevent a claim for compensation being lodged with the civil court. the court may nevertheless decide to await the criminal verdict. one disadvantage is that this civil law route is complicated and can take longer. victims of cross border thb in particular may already have left for their countries of origin. how is a victim made aware of the facilities for compensation when victims of thb encounter the police then in accordance with the framework decision on the status of the victim in criminal proceedings oj l the police must amongst other matters in form the victim of the opportunities for legal advice compensation from the perpetrator or any gov ernment indemnity payment. the police usually refer victims to the victim support bureau bureau slachtofferhulp for practical help where victims can obtain assistance free of charge. legal advice is directive on compensation in connection with the victims of crime april ec oj l eu framework decision on the status of the victim in criminal proceedings march jbz oj l . victims and victim support provided via the legal counters juridische loketten the former legal aid bureaus . the victim care instruction aanwijzing slachtofferzorg prescribes that when noting a report of a crime the police should find out whether the victim has suffered any losses as a result of the offence and if so what these losses are. the victim s report is noted in an appendix to the official report. the integral approach to thb by the chain partners many parties are involved in combating thb. cooperation is increasingly viewed as indis pensable for dealing with the phenomenon effectively. this applies to repressive measures but also to victim support. this was what led the stv to initiate the regional assistance net works.nrm nrm these networks are supervised by a care coordinator or by the stv and operate with collaborative agreements. these are protocols spelling out the purpose of the network and the contributions made by the various parties and they are also signed by the different partners. inspired by positive experiences in the context of juvenile prostitution policy the stv has started a project for a chain partners approach to thb . the aim is to make cooperation more formal more transparent and more focused on results. stv invited municipalities and the networks to make the necessary quality improvements themselves and for this purpose provided a helping hand in the form of a report entitled chain partners approach to trafficking in human beings ketenaanpak tegen mensenhan del . the report is based on the results of national meetings with support staff care coordi nators and chain partners during which bottlenecks and solutions were explored and also on a pilot study which took place in amsterdam. chain partners approach to trafficking in human beings the stv report contains practical points for attention such as the importance of a shared perception on bottlenecks and how this can be achieved the different target groups the partners may have in mind. it is important to be clear about what the target group is and what aims are being sought the different methods for making collaborative agreements within a chain of cooperating partner or ganisations a summary of points for attention in the context of proper assistance for victims including simple explanations satisfactory signalling a single coordinator for each victim a single client file one physical office window for clients and chain partners and an adequate number of reception places the importance of satisfactory allocation of tasks and a clear understanding of how everyone con tributes added value. source stv . reception facilities in its annual report stv stated that it would always succeed in finding a place for a victim in a shelter within hours albeit sometimes with difficulty. the problems were principally the conditions and limitations imposed by the shelter or accommodation centre and also the preference of the police for finding a place not too far from the police district in question. stv experienced an increase in the number of requests for shelter in the first half of however and it became more difficult to find suitable accommodation in such shel trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur ters. in practice when they are looking for accommodation victims often have to tell their story over the phone sometimes several times a practice that is in fact also normal in rela tion to sheltering victims of domestic violence for example. the b regulation including the right to housing and assistance also now applies to victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. there is not much experience yet with this and there are few places available for male victims. reception and safety victims of thb form an awkward target group. at the shelter facilities there is often for instance a fear of the criminal networks behind the victims.nrm with respect to sheltering women a research into safety risks and possibilities for safe houses for seriously threatened women revealed that woman involved in prostitution and thb are considered to be among those most seriously threatened. when these women are taken into shelter it is crucially important to assess the safety risks to themselves any children they may have and also the shelter workers. l nnemann et al. observed that this is not easy and that there is no suitable form of shelter in existence for women who need not only safety but also a lot of as sistance. the newest facilities for women s shelter are the safe houses. they are only available on a temporary basis however and only for a very limited group of women namely those with a certain degree of independence who can cope with an isolated existence. in fact safety is an important topic in connection with shelter for women in general as well as in connection with shelter for male victims whose numbers are growing and for whom there is no secure shelter available stv annual report . category based or integral shelter bnrm recommended obtaining an analysis from the shelter centres of the advantages and disadvantages of category based as opposed to integral shelter for victims of thb and for them to make a proposal on this matter.nrm opinions are divided on the question of whether specific expertise is necessary to work with this target group. there is ongoing con sultation between the ministry of justice the ministry of public health welfare sport as examples of bottlenecks in helping victims of thb knaapen mentions language obstacles cultural differences absence of any future prospects and a lack of confidence in those providing assistance. victims disappear from shelter quite frequently and then return to the traffickers. knaapen points out that many victims of thb are seriously traumatised requiring specialist care. see also zimmerman et al. on this. these are addresses where women can stay if the police feel that they are in a life threatening situation. the police offer protection via an alarm system and extra strictly enforced measures are in place to ensure anonymity. three women s shelter institutions in the netherlands have been administering since or a total of eight houses with places for women and their children. these had been occupied by about women up to the summer of l nnemann et al do not state whether these included victims of thb or how many. a research into supply and demand within women s shelter for which female clients were interviewed including just victims of thb showed that of the women wanted help with their safety and obtained assistance in this area wolf et al. . male victims of thb were reported to the stv in stv nieuws . victims and victim support and other chain partners concerning shelter for victims of thb. one of the options being discussed is a category based reception path before the actual b regulation. this would make it possible to establish the type of care and support required by the victim and also which type of reception he or she needs and it would also be possible to work on cutting the victim loose from the exploiter where necessary. the safety file and continued residence even after the most recent amendment to the b regulation there are still foreign national victims of thb who do not obtain a permit for continued residence based on the results of the criminal proceedings see chapter but who do not want to go back to their countries of origin. after the b regulation expires they can submit an application for continued residence on humanitarian grounds. the ind assesses the application taking account of the risk of reprisals and opportunities for reintegration. it is not easy to substantiate this type of application because in practice the burden of proof is largely imposed on the victim. the various institutions often many of them that the victim will have been involved with during his or her stay in the netherlands may have all sorts of relevant information in this context. the victim and his or her lawyer must be able to get hold of this information for the applica tion for continued residence. in the stv and a range of cooperating partners devel oped a checklist for continued residence in human trafficking cases. points for attention in the checklist for continued residence the checklist for continued residence contains items on the criminal procedure covering reporting a criminal offence investigation prosecution and sen tencing of the accused s financial compensation and missing passports health care and medical treatment for injuries etc reception and assistance safety measures the position of any children the situation in the country of origin. the monitor trafficking in human beings on the position of victims it continues to be difficult to obtain a clear picture of the position of victims of thb. a vic tim monitor has been developed on the instructions of the wodc in order to enable a peri odical assessment of the position of victims of exploitation in the sex industry in the nether lands. the monitor is measuring the position of victims from angles namely . identifying them . access to and use of the b regulation . legal aid criminal proceedings . recep tion accommodation . healthcare . income employment and education and . repatria tion and continued residence. the monitor consists of a total of indicators. temporary category based shelter might also be able to prevent stagnation in reception throughput knaapen . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur three sources of information are being used to collect information namely existing record systems questionnaires addressed to key figures and victims and an analysis of case law van vianen et al. . the collection of data was ongoing at the time when this report was being written. . . specific assistance bodies and initiatives blinn blinn has set up or continued a range of projects for victims of thb in the recent past. buddy projects have been set up in various cities and towns. these are aimed at friendly contact between a volunteer and a victim of thb. blinn can also mediate for individual women elsewhere than in these cities or set up this type of project in a new area. a na tional information and cultural festival is organised each year for the women and their buddies. blinn assists support groups for victims of thb. the aim is to create a safe environment with professional psycho social support where people who share similar experiences can discuss relevant topics. the groups focus on empowerment of the participants. indi vidual support is provided in specific cases. training courses are also developed in the area of social and communicative skills as well as outdoor training courses designed to apply the experience gained in the support groups in a different environment. blinn also has an emergency fund whereby victims of human trafficking can in specific cases and subject to certain conditions apply for support in the form of a loan or a gift. in a total of clients received financial support with almost three quarters of these re ceiving help in the form of a loan. only of them paid the loan back which gave blinn reason to redefine its policy on allocating such loans. blinn is also actively involved in improving the provision of information to victims partly by developing bilingual folders and in organising thematic courses on subjects such as rights in the netherlands bringing up families budgeting sexuality dutch culture and society health and repatriation. blinn can act as a mediator for finding courses education or voluntary work. blinn along with iom la strada stv and srtv is a member of the repatriation re integration covenant see later in this chapter . blinn is actively involved with female victims of thb in aliens detention see . . . blinn supported a total of victims in and in . the figures for in cluded man and those for included men. victims and victim support the international organisation for migration iom under the rean programme iom offers support to victims of thb who want to return to their country of origin. the programme applies to individuals who are not nationals of eu countries. an exception is made however for victims of thb so that even victims from the countries that joined the eu on may can benefit from the programme. the support may consist of a flight ticket and a subsistence allowance. iom can also offer individual me diation depending on the actual demand for assistance and the provisions in the country of origin for example for temporary reception and assistance towards reintegration in the country of origin.nrm within the framework of the randstad return initiative ii rri ii iom has appointed native counsellors in the four major cities in the netherlands to assist with the voluntary repatria tion of undocumented migrants and asylum seekers who have exhausted all available legal remedies. organisations who assist the client during his or her repatriation project can ob tain a contribution towards their costs for doing so infosheet rri ii iom . iom has been implementing the assisted voluntary return and reintegration programme for irregular vulnerable nigerian nationals in ireland and the netherlands since september . the aim of this nigeria project for return of vulnerable migrants is to facilitate the voluntary return and reintegration of vulnerable nigerians such as unaccompanied underage asylum seekers or former ones people with medical problems single parents and victims of thb from the netherlands and ireland. it is possible to offer customised advice in the context of this project for social reintegration and economic independence. another key point is the setting up of a permanent structure to keep track of the individuals who have returned through local non governmental organisations in ireland the netherlands and nigeria and also capacity building within the nigerian ngos. la strada international more than a hundred people work in the nine current la strada partner countries. the annual report contains detailed information on the activities of la strada which are embedded in three campaigns under the umbrella heading of prevention of trafficking in human beings in central and eastern europe these are information lobby prevention and education and social assistance safe return and social inclusion . the figures shown in the annual report give some idea of the considerable impact made by la strada. repatriation and reintegration covenant iom blinn srtvnrm la strada and the stv have made arrangements set out in a covenant to optimise assistance for victims of thb who are returning to their countries of origin. the partners in the covenant consult regularly on help and support for returning rean stands for return and emigration of aliens from the netherlands. it may be assumed that the same applies to victims from countries that joined at a later date. these are poland the czech republic ukraine bulgaria belarus bosnia herzegovina moldavia macedonia and the netherlands where the head office of la strada international is based. see www.lastradainternational.org. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur people to their countries of origin. this can involve consideration of matters such as recep tion accommodation education social services and finding employment. the partners in the covenant also apply themselves to the opportunities for supplying the information needed for the safety file. the integral chain partners approach to prostitution and trafficking in human beings in am sterdam in order to improve information advice and assistance for prostitutes and to redress the shortage of care reception and support facilities for victims of thb as well as improve co operation in these areas all of the relevant chain partners in amsterdam are working on the introduction of an integral chain partners approach to prostitution and thb. a system oriented approach has been chosen along with an outreaching working method. as far as prostitutes are concerned the central issue is strengthening their position empowerment whereas with victims of thb the key point is protection against coercion and exploitation . the elements within this approach are a prostitution help advice and health centre and a thb coordination point. the chain partners in amsterdam are also working on a licensing system for escorts new policy in relation to prostitution involving young men prevention of the loverboy problem reception and support for addicted prostitutes and an approach focusing on perpetrators. rotterdam where there is already experience with a chain partners approach to juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem is working on an approach along similar lines. the scarlet cord het scharlaken koord the scarlet cordnrm sk is one of the participants in the integral system based approach to prostitution and thb as mentioned above in amsterdam. sk works on the streets with prostitutes and this involves prevention information and social assistance. one of the assis tance activities is the exit programme uitstapprogramma for women who want to stop prostitution work. they are offered an individual phased plan dealing at the very least with their financial situation housing education or re education and employment psycho social help aimed at dealing with any sexual traumas building up a social net work and how to deal with their feelings and a different lifestyle a case manager as a point of contact. the exit programme focuses in particular on window prostitutes who are visited by sk during its work on the streets and some of whom are victims of thb . some elements in this approach can also be used with women who have not yet done any work behind a win dow but who are for example already involved in the loverboy circuit. the focus is initially on victims of exploitation in the sex industry but in the longer term the approach and collaborative effort will be extended to all victims of thb. victims and victim support unaccompanied underage asylum seekers amas and former ones the utrecht approach and samah earlier in this chapter we referred to the approach taken with former amas in utrecht. the reception project run by the stichting vluchtelingenwerk in utrecht in a relaxed setting with computers an internet caf and information on countries of origin offers assistance to former amas when they are deciding about their future. the project workers have helped amas and their children since . they endeavour to offer legal assistance provide practical help for instance with finding sports clubs provide group information organise country specific evenings and try to help former amas to find out more about their countries of origin. the subject of repatriation will often arise spontaneously once a re lationship of trust has been built up. some of these former amas will still get a residence permit and some will return to their countries of origin. one benefit of the project is that contact is maintained with the former amas rather than letting them disappear into the realms of illegal residence. the effort is towards engendering pull factors from the countries of origin rather than persuading the former amas to repatriate by using a policy of pushing them into that decision oepkes et al. . this approach is very popular and is being fol lowed up in many municipalities. . dealing with juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem juvenile prostitution is not the same as thb but developments in this area are certainly relevant in the context of this report. after all if someone introduces a minor to prostitu tion this certainly constitutes thb even if no coercion is involved. the involvement of a pimp or trafficker in human beings is not always immediately obvious and juvenile prostitu tion is a phenomenon that has to be combated in itself deserving attention from both the police and the social services. when pimps use seduction techniques to draw girls into prostitution they are what we de scribe as loverboys using loverboy techniques see nrm for an extensive description of this operating method . but they are pimps nonetheless and if they use coercion as part of their technique or draw minors into prostitution they are also human traffickers. as con firmed by bovenkerk et al. there is actually no difference between the today s lover boy and yesterday s pimp. pimps have always used seduction techniques to get women into prostitution and the same methods are applied in cross border thb.nrm the loverboys of today are however probably more mobile bovenkerk et al. . research by the rutgers nisso groep soa aids nederland into sex before the age of showed that of the girls and of the boys had been forced into sex at least once and that of the boys and of the girls had at some point received money or some other reward for sex de graaff et al. . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . . local initiatives the association of dutch municipalities vng took stock of the loverboy problem in dutch municipalities in . the problem appeared to be present in of the municipalities who returned the questionnaire and some of the municipalities had taken considerable strides towards developing an approach to the issue. many of the municipalities indicated that they wanted information on the approach taken by other municipalities. the vng col lated this information into a loverboys information directory. various municipal authorities now have juvenile prostitution projects and plans of approach to address the loverboy problem. generally speaking these sorts of projects combine a re porting centre for loverboy problems with arrangements for an integrated and systematic approach with the aim of preventing minors from being drawn into prostitution e.g. as loverboy victims preventing boys from becoming loverboys providing adequate reception and assistance for victims and investigating and prosecuting suspects. in addition to local au thorities the participating organisations usually include juvenile care bureaus the police the public prosecution service the child protection agency and local projects including those for sheltering victims. the approach in zwolle is described in detail here as an example. the loverboy project in zwolle there has been a loverboy project in zwolle since .nrm it has five aims and was evaluated in . here are the aims in italics the working methods and some of the evaluation results kool preventing girls from falling victim to loverboys the preventative activities consisted of passing on information resilience training and providing in formation at school using a theatrical production and through development of a game. awareness of the loverboy issue has now increased substantially in zwolle. preventing boys from becoming loverboys this involved the use of street workers who concentrated on meeting places made contacts with the target group took stock of the problems and encouraged boys towards courses or facilities in the fields of education income accommodation care and or leisure time. it turned out to be easiest to forge contacts with young adult men and with women than with the target group of to year old youths. an attempt was made to contact this latter group via those who were over and via the women. getting victims out of the circuit there is a loverboys reporting centre where victims and their friends can go on a hour basis. a working group for assisting victims of loverboys meets every four weeks to discuss reports. about half of the reports come in via the reporting centre. this is where the assistance is allocated and also where progress is monitored. a total of reports were received between and concern municipalities were approached. see www.vng.nl. of girls between the ages of and know what a loverboy is as do of those between and . the on track again working method. so as to be able to exchange information within the working group a covenant on information exchange victims and victim support ing possible victims assistance projects were completed and temporary reception places pro vided municipality of zwolle website . investigation of suspects in the period between and the police received reports about men who might possibly be involved in loverboy activity. these resulted in suspects in legal terms. prosecution of suspects between and suspect died and were convicted municipality of zwolle website . some developments indicated since the start of the loverboy project girls are increasingly being approached via chat rooms girls undergoing special education and teenage mothers appear to be risk groups the ethnic diversity of males at risk of becoming involved in loverboy activities seems to be greater than had originally been assumed a distinction was observed between men who were at risk of sinking into crime because of a lack of prospects and men who want to earn a lot of money quickly. prevention can only have an impact on the first group there were increases in the number of notifications of potential victims and the percentage of notifi cations resulting in some assistance being offered. greater awareness of the phenomenon probably means that fewer false notifications are received with a corresponding increase in the effectiveness of reaching victims loverboys now seem to be approaching the victims only when they turn it used to be between and so that they run a lower risk and so that the social services have less time to deploy any sanc tions supervision orders or compulsory education . source kool . the evaluation results were satisfactory but the problem still persists. for this reason the project is to be continued. success factors include an administrator giving impetus to the project a limited number of cooperat ing agencies monitoring of activities and as regards implementation continuity involvement intrin sic motivation collaboration and a focus on prevention. despite these important local initiatives there is still no national picture of the exact nature and scale of juvenile prostitution and the loverboy prob lem. the projects have different target groups and approaches and there is no national feedback or re cord keeping. work is currently underway on a national register for juvenile prostitution. . . national institutions projects and initiatives national register for juvenile prostitution the stv is setting up a national register for juvenile prostitution. this involves firstly noting which organisations are involved with this phenomenon. these vary from local institutions whose primary aim is the prevention of juvenile prostitution or the loverboy problem to na tional institutions with a different or wider remit but who nonetheless encounter juvenile prostitution. the proposed national register is designed not only to provide a national pic regarding loverboys was drafted and approved by the dutch data protection authority. the proposal to extend the scope of application of the juvenile care act wet op de jeugdzorg to year olds will offer a little more elbowroom here provided that the programme has been embarked upon before the victim turns . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur ture of the problem but also to benefit working processes within the organisations con cerned. it has been decided that the register will cover minors and young adults up to the age of who have ended up in prostitution or run the risk of ending up in prostitution. client information will be recorded in relation to them along with information concerning the type of assistance or service provided. ecpat netherlands ecpat campaigns against the commercial sexual exploitation of children.nrm ecpat lobbies the government political parties and social organisations for adequate primary and subordinate legislation aimed at preventing sexual exploitation of children and also at pro viding proper assistance to victims. it also addresses the business world including internet service providers and the travel industry on their responsibilities to protect children against sexual exploitation. a code of conduct has been developed for the travel industry in col laboration with other ecpat departments. this offers the travel industry tour operators airlines hotels travel agencies etc. concrete pointers for counteracting prostitution by minors. ecpat also undertakes research. the results of research into exploitation of minors van de borne kloosterboer were dealt with earlier in this chapter when we described minors as a risk group. the law enforcement group of ecpat europe has developed a multidisciplinary training programme for professionals working with children who are vic tims of trafficking for sexual purposes and children who run an increased risk of becoming such victims. earlier research by this law enforcement group o briain nrm showed that many professionals police social workers had too little understanding of these children and paid too little attention to them. an attempt is being made to raise aware ness among these professionals of the consequences of child trafficking for those children who are involved and also to improve the protection of these children using a training guide and a question and answer booklet o briain et al. a and b . the guide and the booklet contain a wealth of guidelines on how to deal with victims who are minors. here is a selection of them. guidelines for dealing with victims who are minors a selection act in the interests of the minor and act as if you are dealing with your own child get a child to safety avoid having to repeat interviews note down the information arrange for a risk assessment and a psychological assessment do not pressurise them as witnesses arrange for a guardian case manager carry out a needs assessment give appropriate help especially if there are special needs arrange educational facilities as quickly as possible accompany minors during medical examinations the data set will allow distinctions between those who have actually ended up in prostitution and the risk group and also between minors and young adults. victims and victim support only return them to their countries of origin if there is a suitable carer available there take account of the minor s views as regards family reunification make sure that family reunification is assisted by professionals protecting the child s interests prepare any repatriation in advance and arrange for it to be in the company of a guardian or social worker. for more on this see o briain et al. a and b . residential care minors who are victims of loverboys and also girls who are at risk of ending up in prostitu tion and who are not susceptible to help or prevention for instance because of devotion to their loverboy are difficult to help if they are on the streets or in open accommodation. they will often walk out within a few days van dijke et al. . this is why for their own pro tection they are taken off the circuit by means of a child protection sanction and placed in a judicial juvenile institution. this is a placement under civil law in a closed reception institu tion. while it is important to detach these girls from the loverboys locking them up does not sit easily with the child s interests certainly if treatment is not offered perhaps for some time. occasionally victims come into contact with suspects of loverboy offences inside the judicial institutions and parents who opt for closed placement risk a breach of trust with their children according to the amsterdam sexual violence support centre . this is where it is important to look for alternatives. one example is the hour shelter at asja nrm part of frysl n women s reception. this shelter facility operates on a voluntary basis. the support aims at building up a new future. the residents are assisted in making choices in areas such as school employment finances relationships going out and risky behaviour. asja offers a structured daily programme fo cusing on coping learning and developing. asja tries to establish a dialogue with parents and the residents social network because restoring or improving relationships with them is cru cial to successfully helping the residents. the transition to an independent existence involves a risk of falling back into the old familiar situation. the learning house which is a stage between reception and an independent existence is where residents gradually develop their own independence. they learn how to get a grip on their own situation and learn to be responsible in how they deal with freedoms and risks primarily those to do with relation ships sexuality alcohol drugs and money. other national institutions projects and initiatives the national juvenile prostitution platform landelijk platform jeugdprostitutie was estab lished in . the participants who include local and regional organisations and also na tional institutions exchange information a few times each year on recent developments in the area of juvenile prostitution and ongoing projects. the aim is to promote continued collaboration. in the first half of transact set up the juvenile prostitution information centre in formatiepunt jeugdprostitutie which operates as a national information resource. it also trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur sets up the meetings of the juvenile prostitution platform and plays its part by collating good practices on how to deal with juvenile prostitution working plan transact . at the end of the ministry of justice and the ministry of public health wel fare and sport gave the green light and finance for a three year follow up in the form of the juvenile prostitution expertise centre expertisepunt jeugdprostitutie . this has now been subsumed within the new movisie knowledge base. information is also being provided through school and safety about what schools can do as regards safety at school covering matters such as loverboys in relation to the school envi ronment. . points of attention and bottlenecks asylum seekers amas still disappear for unknown destinations. the protocol on missing amas is complex and not sufficiently familiar to many of the co operating partners. this means that it does not work. the termination of allowances for former amas has led in some cases to a marginal exis tence as an illegal resident with all of the associated risks including becoming a victim of exploitation. there is no register for missing adult asylum seekers. the position of victims tensions sometimes arise in practice between the strong policy on immigration and the provisions established for possible victims of thb such as the possibility to report the crime to the police being informed about the b regulation being offered time for reflec tion . progress has been recorded in the field of legal aid for victims of thb. while it is quite clear that the b regulation should be offered if there is the slightest indi cation of thb there is uncertainty surrounding this in practice and it does not always happen. contrary to the terms of the victim care instruction not every victim who has reported the crime of thb and who has indicated a desire to be kept informed of the progress of his or her criminal case is actually kept informed by the public prosecution service. identification of possible victims of thb has improved in aliens detention attention paid to this group and opportunities for supporting them have increased but this remains a matter for concern including situations involving male potential victims. it is not easy to substantiate an application for continued residence because in practice the burden of proof is largely imposed on the victim. this problem no longer applies to some of the victims since the most recent amendment to the b regulation but other vic tims may still encounter this problem. victims and victim support reception and assistance the identification of and support for juvenile prostitutes and victims of thb and of loverboys are now largely and increasingly dealt with under a system oriented chain partners approach. because of the increasing number of applications it is difficult to find suitable accommo dation for victims of thb or to do so quickly. there are still very few places for male victims in shelter facilities and none at all for them in safe houses. there is a question as to whether shelter facilities and social services are adequately geared to and equipped for assistance for male victims. little is yet known about their needs. nor is care coordination often dealt with by coordinators working in the women s reception yet universally available for this group. various dutch municipalities have developed projects for addressing juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem. many of these projects cover how to deal with perpetrators preventively and repressively . this does not seem to be easy and is still in its infancy. registration system the stv victim registration system is missing a lot of information it could include. it is re grettable that this potentially very valuable source of information on victims of thb is not providing adequate results as regards anything more than basic background information such as nationality age gender and the type of person making the notification. administrative enforcement in the prostitution sector . introduction the general ban on brothels was lifted and the commercial operation of prostitution was le galised in see nrm . municipalities obtained the power to regulate the prostitution sector via a licensing system. more than five years after the ban on brothels was lifted a decision was taken to evaluate the situation for a second time. in this context a tripartite research was launched into municipal policy the nature and scale of illegal prostitution and the social position of prostitutes. the results were published in . a new police force monitor on trafficking in human beings thb was published in the same year. these publications which cast more light on the state of affairs in relation to law enforcement in the sex industry were not yet available at the time when this report was written though. this chapter will briefly and only insofar as relevant to the fight against thb outline some significant developments in the sex in dustry and administrative enforcement in the sex industry. . developments in the sex industry fewer licensed sex businesses the number of licensed sex businesses is decreasing. the number of clients is also diminish ing altink bokelman . new forms of prostitution in recent years sexual services have also been on offer clandestinely outside the traditional sex establishments for example in turkish coffee houses chinese and thai massage sa lons gay saunas couples clubs chinese hairdressers nail studios and tanning studios. a hustler circuit has also come into existence where clients are actively approached by mid dle men or the prostitutes themselves for example in hotels night clubs and so on. sexual services are also offered for payment via the internet. internet prostitution appears to be on the increase goderie et al. although there is no real view on the total scale of that market klpd . there are however signs that escorts and escort services are using the internet for advertising purposes and to mediate between client and prostitute and that in some cases dating sites are used as fronts for prostitution de blank in klpd . it also seems that many young male prostitutes work via the internet altink bokelman and that clients are also resorting to webcam sex. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur sex businesses along the lines of the german fkk model have been set up in some police districts. these are houses of recreation with a range of facilities swimming pool sauna restaurant and prostitutes wandering around with whom clients can make their own ar rangements. the clients pay an entrance fee and negotiate separately with the prostitutes who can come and go as they please. prostitutes working on this basis in such establish ments meet the criteria for self employment a factor which makes this particular type of operation attractive to sex entrepreneurs who generally do not want to take prostitutes on as salaried employees see . . . the police also finds that german operators are now re cruiting clients in the netherlands more often than was previously the case. thai massage salons de rode draad confirms a remarkable increase in the number of thai massage salons in the nether lands altink bokelman . they visited salons in the context of their field work. knotter carried out ethnographic research into thai massage salons and visited seven of them. both studies share a number of observations not all thai massage salons offer sex the sex that is on offer varies from a hand job after a massage to regular sex the atmosphere varies accordingly from thai hospitality with clients hanging around and joining in for meals to commercial and business like some salons including those offering sex are licensed the masseuses enter into marriages of conven ience to be able to work legally in the netherlands speak little dutch and seem poorly integrated into dutch society. both studies report thai massage salons refusing access to the researchers not wanting to cooperate in any way and showing this in quite a blunt manner. it is unclear how often this hap pened. it seems likely that at these salons abuse may have been going on but this could not be con firmed in any way. both de rode draad and knotter asked about and were on the lookout for signs of abuse at the salons they visited. de rode draad reports the imposition of debts deception during re cruitment and dependency on the operators. knotter indicates the activity of criminal organisations bringing women to the netherlands and putting them to work in prostitution it was often difficult to discuss this subject and it only came to light once we had gained their full trust. this was not just be cause the masseuses had experienced terrible things forced prostitution exploitation violence and in timidation but also because the organisations are very powerful and dangerous. the illegal sex industry a proportion of the sex businesses mentioned earlier are unlicensed or illegal. an unli censed sex business can only be qualified as illegal if it is required to have a licence in the mu nicipality where it is based. the unlicensed and illegal circuit is associated with thb. the fact is that no administrative checks are made there which makes it a suitable refuge for human traffickers. de rode draad visited licensed and unlicensed sex businesses across the netherlands and discov ered abuses such as extremely long working hours living at the workplace dependence on the operator and poor payment altink bokelman . these abuses may indicate thb. administrative enforcement in the prostitution sector escorts escort businesses based in municipalities where there is no licensing requirement for es corts can actually operate without restriction in every municipality in the netherlands. streetwalkers zones and street prostitution streetwalkers zones were closed in a number of municipalities rotterdam the hague and amsterdam partly because the municipalities were increasingly coming under fire for facilitating thb there. the closures in rotterdam and the hague were accompanied by re ception facilities and an offer of assistance for dutch addicted prostitutes. streetwalkers zones were maintained or even opened in other municipalities. the proponents of street walkers zones point out that the social services and police can keep an eye on a group of prostitutes there who would otherwise disappear from view. it is not clear whether the prostitutes who used to work in the streetwalkers zones that have been closed are still work ing and if so where korf et al. . in some municipalities not only the prostitutes but also their pimps and clients are addressed in terms of the general municipal ordinance prohibiting street prostitution algemene plaatselijke verordening apv . accession of new eu member states romania and bulgaria joined the eu on january . when other countries in central and eastern europe joined the eu in there was speculation that the number of prosti tutes and or victims of thb from these countries would increase. no such increase has been established probably for two reasons. first of all the accession was preceded by abolition of the visa requirement so that residents of the acceding countries could already come to the netherlands and stay there for three months without visas. secondly restrictions on the free movement of labour from those countries were imposed when they joined the eu making it difficult to work in the prostitution sector. there was in fact little change for pros titutes from these countries when they joined the eu. since bulgaria and romania are in a similar position an increase of prostitutes from these countries upon their accession to the eu is not anticipated either. furthermore all indications point to the fact that prostitutes from these countries who want to or have to work in the netherlands are already here. nor is the termination of the temporary restrictions on the free movement of workers from the new eu member states expected to have an impact on the number of prostitutes from these countries. operators of sex establishments do not take on any salaried employees but rather look for structures in terms of which the prostitutes are self employed see . . and residents of the new member states are already allowed to work on a self employed ba sis in the netherlands. no employment permits for the prostitution sector are issued in the netherlands. independent self employment from the new member states is permitted but subject to certain rules. see also chapter . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . administrative enforcement since the general ban on brothels was lifted the municipalities are to pursue a local policy on prostitution based on a licensing system for the operation of sex businesses. this section discusses how enforcement takes place primarily as it relates to the rules on thb. . . preventive enforcement preventive enforcement is aimed at preventing offences and abuses. in the regulation of the prostitution industry preventive enforcement is primarily undertaken through the issue of licences. this job is done by the municipalities. the general municipal ordinance apv municipalities can set out rules in the apv on the establishment set up and operation of sex establishments within their area limits. as far as we are aware all municipalities that have adopted a prostitution policy use the apv to impose as a condition of granting a licence a prohibition against putting minor or undocumented prostitutes or victims of thb to work. these municipalities have made different choices as to which forms of prostitution are cov ered by the licensing system. as far as we are aware virtually all of the municipalities have included brothels and window prostitution in the licensing system. this does not apply in relation to escort services home workers or street prostitution. the bibob act public administration probity screening act the bibob act can play an important part in the granting of licences to operators or aspir ing operators in the prostitution sector. this act allows for a licence not to be issued or not to be extended if there is a serious risk that it is likely also to be used for the commission of criminal offences or the enjoyment of the proceeds of such offences. in of the requests for advice to the bibob bureau related to operating licences for sex businesses. a public prosecutor who has information indicating that a party involved is connected with an offence can point out to an administrative body the desirability of asking for a bibob ad vice. pilots were undertaken between the end of and the start of in three regions in order to gain experience in this area. these resulted in twelve tip offs from the public prosecution service pps to various municipalities and five requests by municipalities for advice from the bibob bureau. when this chapter was being written an evaluation of the bibob act was about to be completed. one question the evaluation looks at is whether the implementation of the act act of october parliamentary papers ii . no. which entered into force on june . this means that advice on this subject was requested in cases. provisional information from the bibob bureau of april showed that requests for advice were submitted in in connection with licences for sex businesses. administrative enforcement in the prostitution sector has led to any shift of crime towards the unlicensed sector in terms of the sex industry or to different municipalities. the municipality of amsterdam was the first administrative body in the netherlands to try and formulate an administrative approach to organised crime on the larger scale under the van traa project huisman et al. . this project involved the collection and analysis of relevant information also from partners such as the police the pps and the tax admini stration and on the basis of this information the adoption of administrative measures in the prostitution sector. the evaluation huisman et al. shows that it is impossible to compel cooperation from the partners and that informational housekeeping on the part of city district authorities and municipal services is inadequate. the researchers also indicate that there seems to be some sort of mutual dependence between sex club owners and the municipality the operators need the municipality to obtain licences for example but they also have a means of exerting pressure through their ownership of real estate. nevertheless some results were achieved such as the introduction of screening procedures for the issue of licences. the approach in amsterdam is in line with the concept of obstruction introduced by the police and according to the minister of justice it offers important pointers for fur ther development of an approach where criminal law enforcement coexists and cooperates with administrative enforcement. amsterdam is one of the cities with a high concentration of prostitution using the bibob act for administrative enforcement in the sex industry. having obtained advice from the bibob bureau the municipality of amsterdam made known its intention in not to is sue or extend licences for the operation of sex businesses in the red light district. the parties concerned lodged formal objections and at the time of writing this report the case is still before the courts. in the meantime by a provisional relief the businesses are allowed to remain open. they can threaten to sell up everything or rent it out to people they know the municipality would prefer to keep out of the area. or perhaps the operator owns property which the municipality would like to use in a particular way. this sometimes led to a trade off for example with the municipality allowing a certain activity at site x in exchange for a concession from the other party at site y. this concept introduced by the investigation project group under the chairmanship of the chief constable of the amsterdam police is based on the idea that an criminal law approach alone is not enough and that barriers must be erected by every imaginable partner for example central government municipalities the business community and citizens in order to prevent crime or put an early stop to it. a press release from the municipality of amsterdam dated november mentioned licences in the prostitution sector in the catering business and one building permit for a sex business. two of the licences related to sex businesses in a different part of the city. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . . supervision in most dutch municipalities administrative checks on compliance with licence condi tions for running a sex establishments are undertaken by the police. from the perspective of this supervisory duty a distinction can be made in the sex industry between . licensed and site specific sex businesses e.g. licensed clubs window prostitution and home workers . licensed non site specific sex businesses e.g. licensed escort bureaus and . unlicensed sex businesses that actually are required to have a licence site specific or not e.g. businesses where the commercial sex is clandestine see . . supervision of the first category is relatively speaking the most straightforward and is also the most systematic. but the checks still leave something to be desired in some police dis tricts. sex establishments are not for example visited often enough. abuses including vic tims of thb are still found in the licensed circuit. the supervision over the second category or escort sector needs further explanation. ini tially there were no mechanisms available for supervising the escort sector but these have now been developed. one example is the hotel procedure where a police officer pretends to be a client and orders an escort whereupon he will check whether the prostitute is of age the legality of her residential status and whether she is working of her own free will. one disadvantage of the hotel procedure is that it takes up a lot of capacity. a mechanism taking up less capacity is the so called fax bombardment . untraceable mobile numbers found in escort adverts are deluged with fax or text messages every minutes. the message is to the effect that the recipient is operating an unlicensed escort business and must contact the mu nicipality. the aim here is to make it impossible for the business to operate by ensuring that it can no longer be reached. the plan of approach regulation and protection in the prostitution sector plan van aan pak ordening en bescherming prostitutiesector proposes measures for improving adminis trative enforcement in the prostitution sector in general and the escort sector in particular. one of these measures is a national registration system for escort licences. at the time when this report was being written the ministry of justice had instructed that research be carried out into how such a system could be set up. the police are then acting as a mandated supervisory body. the unlicensed operation of sex businesses which are not covered by the licensing system is permitted in those municipal areas where no licensing system has been introduced or where certain forms of prostitution have been excluded from it such as escorts and working from home so that these sex businesses are not supervised either. prostitutes working on a self employed basis are classified with the sex businesses for this overview. this is assumed in police circles but also indicated in a study by de rode draad altink bokelman and the stv annual report. submitted to the lower house by the minister of justice on behalf of the cabinet in july . administrative enforcement in the prostitution sector checks on the unlicensed illegal sex industry the third category happen significantly less often than checks on the licensed sex industry. in most municipalities it is prohibited to run an unlicensed sex establishment. this means that supervising agencies must first check whether or not there is a sex business which is not always easy. illegality and thb under the transitional arrangements for the free movement of workers within the eu citi zens of the member states which joined the eu in and may work in the nether lands as prostitutes on a self employed basis but not as employees. in other words a bulgar ian prostitute for example would be legal in the netherlands if she was working as a self employed individual in the sex industry but illegal if she was in paid employment here. it is therefore necessary for those supervising the prostitution sector to check on the employ ment status in order to establish whether or not someone is legally residing in the nether lands. this is not simple however especially when sex work is taking place in the club cir cuit. hitherto operators and prostitutes in this sector claim that the work is on a self employed basis while the tax administration concluded in all of the cases it has investi gated that prostitutes were working as paid employees at clubs. the question is how a mu nicipal supervisor can check on this employment status brugman . the national expert group on thb landelijke expertgroep mensenhandel lem has accordingly ob served that the police have no possibilities for checking whether or not someone is working in paid employment and that the police can thus only check on illegal residence. it is left to the tax administration and the immigration and naturalisation service immigratie en naturalisatiedienst ind to check the employment situation and its implications for resi dential status. however this also has consequences for administrative checks on thb. pre viously prostitutes residing in the netherlands illegally could be stopped and taken to the police station where they would also be interviewed about possibly being a victim of thb. in these circumstances the police claim victims were more inclined to talk about this than when at their places of work. now that prostitutes from the new eu countries can reside le gally in the netherlands and their employment situation is not being or cannot be checked the opportunity to pry them loose from their situation no longer exists which means that it is more difficult to detect victims of thb and to obtain reports of the offence from them. checking up on employment situations has the disadvantage that it is confronta tional for prostitutes whether or not they are victims of thb. the police come to be re garded as the long arm of the tax administration which can be obstructive to building up any relationship of trust with prostitutes. this factor can also hinder the detection of victims. duty and role of the police and the municipality as it became clear that there was uncertainty about the duty and role of the police in relation to enforcement in the prostitution sector the steering group of the quality enforcement project handhaven op niveau determined that the administrative authority should fully carry the strategic responsibility for the implementation of enforcement duties and that trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur with the police input should be complementary to the administrative input. the police nev ertheless indicate that there is a lack of initiative on this within many municipalities. this co incides with the findings of bressers et al. . if during administrative checks the police come across on any criminal offences then they may proceed with a criminal investigation as a continuation of this exercise. if however when exercising their duties under criminal law the police happen on breaches of licensing conditions they are not in a position to take any administrative steps themselves. such steps are only possible if the administrative authority is informed. for that reason the instrument of the administrative report was introduced. this is a written notification of the police to the administrative authority of a municipality stating that in the course of their duties under criminal law they have encountered facts and circumstances that are being brought to the attention of the administrative authority. the administration can then take appropriate ad ministrative measures if it wishes separate from any possible measures under criminal law. in practice written reports by the police as the administrative supervisor to the munici palities are also called administrative reports . erotic advertising covenant since october sex businesses that place erotic adverts in priced as opposed to free daily newspapers are required to include their licence number in their adverts. this makes supervision easier. the covenant also establishes that text will be interspersed among the erotic adverts drawing customers attention to the fact that they will run less risk of for in stance encountering a victim of thb if they deal with a licensed business. this allows the customer to make a well considered choice. . . repressive enforcement preventive enforcement taking the form of granting licences on certain conditions has the greatest impact if it is coupled with consistent and visible repressive enforcement. in other words sanctions must be imposed on licence holders who do not observe the condi tions. these may vary from a warning a restriction in opening hours or imposition of an administrative penalty to the temporary or permanent closure of the sex establishment and revocation of the licence. administrative activity not up to scratch there is criticism on the administrative enforcement by municipalities. police forces charged with supervising the prostitution sector regularly mention municipalities failing to address cases abuses or failing to respond to administrative reports by the police. this is set out in an agreement between the ministry of justice and the dutch daily press group groep nederlandse dagbladpers . publishers of daily papers were already obliged under administrative law to provide information on advertisers if asked to do so. administrative enforcement in the prostitution sector . . amendment of legislation and regulations various parties argue that there are shortcomings in the current enforcement policy and leg islation. for example they feel that the present statutory framework is inadequate to make non site specific prostitution manageable and that there is no uniform policy. these are some of the reasons why asante and schaapman and altink and bokelman argue for amendments to laws and regulations. decentralised prostitution policy which was opted for when the general ban on brothels was lifted has resulted in local differences as regards the substance of licence conditions as well as the scope of general municipal ordinances. the differences between the various municipal licensing systems result in disparate opportunities for supervision and enforce ment which exploitative operators and human traffickers can take advantage of. the water bed effect can be counteracted by providing a stricter national framework for decentralised prostitution policy through additional formal legislation. this can be done in various ways also in such a way that municipalities maintain scope to pursue a prostitution policy attuned to local preferences and needs. municipal authorities should be obliged to regulate certain matters in their local prostitution policy which at the moment is only op tional. this might involve amendment of the municipalities act gemeentewet in such a way that municipalities would have to develop a licensing system for every establishment where commercial sexual transactions are provided or where facilities are provided for such trans actions to be undertaken with or for a third party. in other words a compulsory local prosti tution policy in relation to all forms of prostitution including escort home work and any thing that might be developed in future in terms of creative business formats in this area. in this scenario the responsibility for developing the substantive licence conditions and en forcement of the policy would remain with the municipalities themselves. there are however other options for example more far reaching legislation including a prescription of substantive minimum standards to be imposed and enforced at the local level. these and other possible forms of further formalisation of a decentralised prostitu tion policy require further scrutiny by legislative jurists and interested parties. the fact that shortcomings of legislation and enforcement at the local level impact on the occurrence of thb does not alter the fact that central government remains responsible for combating thb. improving the fight against involuntary prostitution was one of the targets of the abolition of the general ban on brothels and the responsibility for achieving this tar get still lies with central government. greater uniformity in municipal policies regarding substantive licensing conditions could also be promoted via the netherlands association of municipalities vereniging nederlandse gemeenten vng . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . points of attention and bottlenecks a part of the sex industry is illegal or not subject to licensing requirements. there are in adequate checks in this part of the industry for abuses so that it amounts to a refuge for human traffickers. this category includes for example businesses clandestinely offering sexual services such as turkish coffee houses massage salons saunas hairdressing sa lons nail studios and tanning studios along with in some municipalities prostitutes who work from home. non site specific prostitution businesses such as escort services do not require a licence in every municipality and where they do the administrative checks are not easy and la bour intensive. it is hard to supervise businesses whether they operate illegally or not where both paid and unpaid sex takes place such as couples clubs. when prostitutes who might be vic tims of thb pose as unpaid participants the supervisory agencies are powerless. abuses including indicators pointing towards thb are also found in the licensed sex industry. the fact that it is still possible to put victims of thb to work in the licensed sex industry is not always the fault of the operator or the supervising agency. victims are sometimes very adept at concealing the fact that they are victims of thb aided by the fact that human traffickers are often very expert in fabricating false identity documents. if victims are working legally the supervising agencies have few tools to investigate the situation. this applies for instance to victims coming from the new eu member states of bulgaria and romania who because of their self employed status work legally in pros titution in the netherlands. these countries have long been among the significant coun tries of origin for victims. the municipalities are charged with taking the initiative and responsibility for adminis trative enforcement of the prostitution sector. a number of municipalities are failing in this area. for example measures are not always adopted in response to administrative reports of confirmed abuses. this obstructs the aim of achieving a clean licensed sex in dustry and the smallest possible illegal sex industry . because not every abuse can be de tected with administrative checks even in the licensed sex industry other parties do also carry responsibility including clients operators social workers neighbours pass ers by and others who are involved in the field professionally or otherwise. a number of municipalities have closed down streetwalkers zones. the impact of this is not yet clear. we do not know for instance where the illegal prostitutes who worked there and who might be victims of thb have gone. the results of administrative checks and enforcement are not sufficiently transparent so there is a lack of knowledge concerning abuses found in the licensed sex industry. this also makes it difficult to verify allegations of such abuses. maintaining administrative supervision on the escort sector takes up police capacity and some municipalities do not make any compensation for this although this has been agreed. administrative enforcement in the prostitution sector it is evident that collaboration and exchange of information among the chain partners such as the police pps tax administration and others can lead to positive results in both preventive and repressive enforcement in the prostitution sector. investigation . introduction this chapter deals with the investigation of trafficking in human beings thb and the way this has been affected by the expansion of the article on thb in the dutch criminal code. one of its results is an increase in the number of parties involved in the investigation of thb. . national developments including policy developments and initiatives . . police management of the police the state has assumed greater control over the management of the police partly through the establishment of national priorities in investigation setting up a national crime squad nationale recherchenrm nr and concluding performance contracts with all of the re gional police forces. focus on trafficking in human beings the ministers of justice and of the interior and kingdom relations the public prosecution service pps and the police have repeatedly highlighted the priority of combating thb al beit sometimes under the heading of migration crime and or in the context of people smug gling. the ministers of justice and of the interior and kingdom relations have formulated six priorities for the national crime squad and the national public prosecutor in the years ahead. thb is one of them. national thb expert group the prostitution thb project of the dutch police project prostitutie mensenhandel van de nederlandse politie ppm dnp nrm came to an end as a project on january but con tinued under the name of the national thb expert group landelijke expertgroep mensen handel lem . various publications have warned about the negative effects of this system such as the un intentional selection of more straightforward cases manipulation of data and a reduced orientation towards the local environment vlek et al. jochoms et al. . the other areas are people smuggling trafficking in cocaine or heroin synthetic drugs illegal trafficking in firearms and explosives terrorism and other extreme forms of ideologically motivated crime and money laundering. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur lem is scheduled to publish a new thb police force monitor korpsmonitor in de scribing the actual state of affairs in relation to the fight against thb. it was clear from the last thb police force monitor coster that not every regional police force was yet meeting the standards set at the time. other relevant lem products and activities will be discussed elsewhere in this chapter. expertise centre on thb people smuggling the expertise centre on thb people smuggling expertisecentrum mensenhandel en mensensmokkel emm was set up at the national crime squad on may and is a collaborative venture between klpd national crime squad and dnri national crime intelligence service the royal netherlands marechaussee koninklijke marechausee social investigation and information service sociale inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst siod and immigration and naturalisation service immigratie en naturalisatiedienst ind . emm operates as a collection point for information on among other things indi cations of thb both within and outside the sex industry . the information is supplied by institutions dealing with thb from the perspectives of investigation supervision checks or assistance. at emm this information is processed analysed and made available for tactical and strategic purposes. the emm is directed by the national public prosecutor who coordinates the campaign against thb and people smuggling at the national public prosecutor s office. operational consultation group on trafficking in human beings the operational consultation group on trafficking in human beings operationeel over leg mensenhandel oom in which all regional police forces exchange operational informa tion on thb still meets every two months.nrm aliens police some of the tasks of the aliens police were taken over by the ind and the municipalities in and so more investigative capacity within the aliens police became available. this capacity is also being deployed in various regional police forces to help combat thb. . . royal netherlands marechaussee since the royal netherlands marechaussee had been supplying staffing capacity to police forces to support actions against cross border crime. this capacity in the form of cross border crime squads goc teams was also deployed to combat thb. these cross border crime squads were disbanded with effect from january . collaboration with the royal netherlands marechaussee does continue to take place in expertise centres with the importance of reporting indications of thb by the various institutions to emm is described in the thb guidelines aanwijzing mensenhandel issued by the board of procurators general entered into force on april . these included aliens administration by the ind and front office duties by the municipalities . investigation regard to specific areas of attention including that of dealing with cross border trafficking in human beings . . . special investigation services and inspection services the number of organisations involved in detecting and investigating thb has grown be cause the criminalisation of thb with effect from january also covers exploitation outside the sex industry and coerced organ removal. the thb guidelines issued by the board of procurators general mentions several organisations that might encounter forced labour or services in the context of their supervision and enforcement. apart from the police the royal netherlands marechaussee municipalities and the harbour police these include among others the health and safety inspectorate arbeidsinspectie ai the siod and the fiscal information and investigation service economic audit service fiscale inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst economische controledienst fiod ecd . . identifying possible thb situations this section will explore the way in which indications of thb are identified and how they actually or potentially reach the investigation agencies. identifying possible thb situations by the police the police have an important part to play in identifying cases of thb. this is partly a result of their supervisory duties in the prostitution industry see chapter and partly based on their role in criminal law enforcement. the police have deployed a range of activities in re cent years in order to improve on the identification and registration of indications of thb. a list of indications that might point towards exploitation in the sex industry was developed some time ago.nrm this list of indications has been adjusted so that it can now be used for the investigation of exploitation in other employment sectors apart from the sex industry as well and also for investigation of coerced organ removal. another new feature is the re cording of indications that might point towards an increased risk for certain individuals of becoming a victim of thb such as sudden behavioural changes running away or poor con tacts with home. the list of indications can also be used by bodies other than the police. a booklet on thb has been developed in order to increase awareness of the phenomenon of thb in employment sectors other than the sex industry and to bring about a general im provement in the identification of thb. this booklet has been distributed both within the police and elsewhere. this sort of activity is important because thb within the sex indus try and elsewhere is not always recognised as such by police officers and signs of it are not the services mentioned here with the exception of the health and safety inspectorate ai are special investigation services bijzondere opsporingsdiensten bods . the ai is an inspection service with officials appointed as special detective officers authorised to investigate particular criminal offences which do not include thb. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur always recorded as such in police systems. for this reason some regional police forces use special search questions to filter out any indications of thb from the police systems. gen erally this operates very successfully particularly as regards indications of loverboy situa tions. in its annual plan lem indicates that the information campaign on thb entitled appearances are deceptive schijn bedriegt must be continued at a national level in light of its success so far. it should also be expanded to cover other forms of exploitation. attention has also been focussed on thb in the national training for runners in the crimi nal intelligence units cies since . we are not aware at the present time of exactly how much information on thb the cies are actively acquiring. projects however have been started up in some regional police forces with a view to improving the information position for the cies as regards thb. there are regular comments on the difficulty of initiating criminal investigations on the basis of cie information. various criminal investigations have however been instigated in recent years based partly on cie information.nrm in some regional police forces cards whether obviously issued by the police or otherwise have been passed out to prostitutes containing information about where they can report any abuse. they sometimes include both the telephone number of the police force and the number of meld misdaad anoniem report crime anonymously crimestoppers . the intention is that any serious indications of thb will be passed on to emm. these indi cations possibly taken in aggregate may result in new cases or may be relevant to ongoing ones. despite these various initiatives the identification of signs of thb is not yet as satisfactory as it could be. there are a number of reasons for this some of which are beyond the control of the police. for example victims of thb do not always want to be recognised as such and sometimes do everything in their power to avoid being spotted. this may be due to fear of the traffickers or the fact that they are actually earning some income however little so that they have an interest in trying to ensure that their situation does not change. this does not alter the fact that victims who do wish to break free from their situation are not always rec ognised or helped by the police. for example a group of victims may never come in contact with the police because there are insufficient police checks in the illegal sex industry even though it might be assumed that this sector would include more victims of thb than the li censed sector. the same applies to victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex in dustry although there are also other bodies apart from the police who can pick up signs of thb here. the aliens police have a specific role in identifying signs of thb both within the sex industry and elsewhere. because of their potential involvement with illegally resident and or working victims when dealing with illegal immigration an awareness of the signs of thb is very important for this service. awareness in this area on the part of the aliens po lice leaves something to be desired however. this is partly a result of their focus on the re m. is the contact line for the foundation report crime anonymously also known as crimestoppers where information on criminal offences can be reported anonymously by telephone. investigation moval of illegal immigrants which conflicts with the necessary attention to detect and pro tect possible victims of thb. in practice blinn for example has noted that staff at the aliens police and at centres for detention of aliens are in fact prepared to cooperate with improvements in connection with the identification of thb boermans . victims who are prepared to report the offence are not always offered the opportunity and or they are not offered the facilities to which they are entitled for example in the con text of the b regulation. in certain cases it appears that the period for reflection in particu lar is either not offered or is offered for less than three months. it also appears that contrary to the thb guidelines the police do not always pass on re ports of offences involving thb to the pps but either drop them or dispose of them in house for example if they think the case is not interesting from the perspective of criminal law. in fact police officers have indicated that if they invest time with possible victims i.e. if they build up some degree of confidence and provide accurate information the victims will relatively often be actually prepared to report the offence after all. emm operates as a collection point for information on indications of thb both for the police and for other bodies see . . . however not every regional police force currently provides information to emm on a systematic basis or on its own initiative. reporting by other bodies which might provide indications of thb also requires improvement. at emm itself there were actually unfilled vacancies for about a year and a half after it was set up so that it was battling against a backlog of information processing. identifying possible thb situations by the royal netherlands marechaussee the royal netherlands marechaussee views its role in identifying indications of thb as a major one. one team of the royal netherlands marechaussee sluisteam operating at schi phol airport also keeps its eyes open for thb in addition to being alert for possible cases of people smuggling. frequently encountered indications of thb include multiple sponsor ship arrangements suitcases full of lingerie and fake or forged identity documents. accord ing to the royal netherlands marechaussee maintaining a keen observation of people in transit areas which account for of the passengers visiting schiphol is particularly fruit ful in supplying indications of possible cases of thb. these transit areas are the places where for example passports are exchanged or new tickets are supplied. there are in stances of individuals who only buy a flight ticket so as to be able to enter the transit area they have no intention of flying. identifying possible thb situations by other investigation services and bodies other organisations also encounter indications and or victims of thb such as the siod the ai the fiod ecd the ind and certain assistance organisations and interest groups. see for example the monitor trafficking in human beings on the position of victims van vianen et al. . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the siod deals with fraud in the areas of employment and income. many of the siod in vestigations relate primarily to organised illegal employment. these investigations which often concern possible cases of people smuggling regularly disclose that migrant workers are dependent on those who provide the work for instance with regard to forged identity documents and or accommodation. this multiple dependency is a sign of possible exploita tion. the siod focuses on specific risk categories for example certain business sectors. in these included horticulture fruit growing and the food industry. these are economic activities that have come up as risk sectors for thb in the bnrm research of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry see chapter . if the siod has indications of thb that go beyond the service s own duties and powers then the national office of the public prosecutor or the competent local public prosecutor s office will be informed. indications of cases that do fall within its own ambit are dealt with by the national public prosecutor s of fice for economic and environmental offences functioneel parket fp . in this context the siod undertakes its own investigations into thb see . on this . bnrm research has shown that the labour market fraud teams of the ai are in a good po sition to spot exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry see chapter . these teams visit the shop floor in many of the economic sectors where there is an increased risk of exploitation in order to monitor compliance with the aliens employment act wet arbeid vreemdelingen wav . domestic work forms an important exception because stricter con ditions apply to inspection in private households. the bnrm study on exploitation outside the sex industry also shows that when the inspectors from these teams recognise signs of se rious abuse they generally pass the information on to colleagues within the ai responsible for enforcing regulations on working conditions. nearly half of the labour market fraud teams indicated that they also drew the attention of other bodies such as municipalities siod or the police or aliens police to possible exploitative situations. since the ai can dispose of cases of illegal employment by imposing an administrative fine. as far as identifying possible thb is concerned this has the disadvantage that no fur ther investigation is made and no official report is made out beyond a report for the fine so that there is a chance that less information on abuse is being documented and passed to other bodies. following the amendment of the minimum wage and minimum holiday al lowance act in connection with the introduction of administrative enforcement the ai will in future also be responsible for the administrative enforcement of this act. this may contribute towards the further identification and combating of exploitation the primary area of investigation for the fiod ecd the investigation service of the tax administration is fiscal fraud. according to the tax administration annual report fiod ecd employees are sometimes confronted with signs of exploitative practices dur ing their investigations at businesses. in this was the case in out of a total of investigations siod . investigation as regards the information base of the services mentioned above it may be instructive for the netherlands to look at the belgian experience in dealing with thb for exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. the belgian approach to exploitation outside the sex industry exploitation outside the sex industry has been punishable in belgium for longer than in the nether lands. the belgian experience shows that it is not easy to secure an effective contribution from in spection services and special investigation services in the fight against thb. although the belgian so cial inspectorate and the inspectorate of social laws have been involved in this since no joint checks are made in some districts or there is no contact between the social inspectorate and the thb contact officers. the inspection services also make little use of their powers to prepare official reports in relation to thb. this may be the result of a lack of experience and the fact that their principal duty is to investigate labour law infringements and they view thb as being a job for the police. other prob lems in belgium include the fact that the inspection and investigation services do not always recognise victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry as such and that eschewing any uniform policy not all of the partners deal with victims in the same way. according to the belgian centre for equal opportunities and opposition to racism there is a need to train all of the partners involved in finding identifying and making referrals for victims of exploitation in other sectors than the sex indus try. thb for labour exploitation may also be detected in the context of dealing with illegality in volving a large number of authorities with various specific aims and powers. this means that the multidisciplinary intervention teams dealing with for example illegal employment may also spot indications of thb. many of their checks after all are carried out in sectors that are sensitive to exploitation. ind staff may also provide information on indications of thb. the ind does not have any internal instructions on this however. because people involved in asylum proceedings can be victims of thb and because the ind increasingly has to deal with foreign nationals who first of all apply for asylum and then indicate that they are victims of thb the ind is now paying greater attention to thb in the asylum procedure. assistance bodies and interest organisations can also help identify cases of thb. some non governmental organisations ngos pass on signs of possible thb to the police anony mously . also in relation to exploitation outside the sex industry ngos particularly those in contact with people who are vulnerable in employment situations can contribute to this information is drawn from de baets and the centre for equal opportunities and opposition to racism . article quinquies of the belgian criminal code on putting someone to work in degrading circumstances. intervention teams involve collaboration between the tax administration the social insurance bank ai the social security agency uwv municipal authorities the police and the p ps. the siod offers analytical support to the intervention teams. the information included here in relation to indications from the ind is based on a letter from the ind to bnrm dated march . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur wards identifying cases of thb. one problem however is that fear of being deported from the country will often deter the undocumented clients of these ngos from reporting ex ploitative practices to the authorities. putting the individual client s interests first ngos will usually also not be inclined to pass information to for example the police or the ai about an illegal client who is a possible victim of exploitation. this attitude on the part of many ngos can only be expected to change if the organisations are and can be confident that reporting exploitation is in the interests of the individual concerned. some trade unions may also contribute towards identifying cases of this form of thb albeit that the unions seldom actually reach employees who fall victim to violence or physi cal deprivation of freedom through criminals. no trade union work can be undertaken in these circuits because of safety issues. trade unions may well pick up on signs of these types of excesses which can then be reported to the police the siod or the ai. employee organi sations therefore need to become involved as new partners in the chain in the efforts to provide early signs of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. identifying possible thb situations by private citizens the campaign entitled schijn bedriegt appearances are deceptive was initiated throughout part of the netherlands on january by the foundation report crime anonymously stichting meld misdaad anoniem m. the campaign s aim was to help clients of prosti tutes and others directly or indirectly involved to recognise signs of coerced prostitution and to report these to the police or anonymously to m. an animation film on thb was shown on the internet and regional television in the context of this campaign. articles were also published in the daily papers and in weekly and freely circulating papers. leaflets and posters were also distributed in the participating regional police forces through for exam ple local authority offices schools and municipal health services. in the first half of the campaign produced usable reports of thb by way of com parison there were in the whole of . eleven of the reports related to underage vic tims. three of the other reports related to men and to women. investigations were initi ated in a number of police forces as a result of these reports. at various locations these led to the discovery of possible victims and the arrest of suspects. an illegal brothel was also closed. a number of the ensuing investigations are still ongoing so there may be even more results. as planned the campaign was drawn to a close at the end of june . at the time of writ ing this report a possible follow up is still under discussion. this has become apparent in the bnrm research into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry from interviews with directors of fnv bondgenoten trade union federation and information from the cnv vakcentrale trade union federation . commissioned and financed by the ministry of justice. reports contained enough concrete information to be usable and reports resulted in follow up action on the part of the police. investigation since exploitation outside the sex industry is also now punishable as thb more individuals may encounter indications of the offence. thus people working with asylum seekers or ille gal immigrants front line doctors teachers market operators lawyers neighbours and oth ers may notice and report signs of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. this does require a raising of awareness. . investigation of thb organisation of police investigation the organisation of investigative work varies markedly from one police force to another. this is not surprising as the forces are autonomous in this area. there are however teams specialising in thb and prostitution in many regional police forces which undertake smaller scale thb investigations in addition to their checks on the prostitution industry. if a thb investigation is taking place on a larger scale or appears likely it is delegated to re gional investigation teams. the national and supra regional crime squads can also under take investigations involving cases of thb. police investigation in practice various police officers indicate that the approach to thb leaves something to be desired. not every case with suitable grounds for investigation or what police officers describe as sufficient evidence is pursued. police try to pass cases on to other regional police forces or the national crime squad without taking any action in the meantime even though this is not permissible. there is not generally a great deal of willingness on the part of other police forces to take over cases. there is also uncertainty about which cases can be regarded as the responsibility of the national crime squad or not so that cases are sent to the national crime squad whereupon some time may elapse before it is noticed that the national crime squad has not taken up the case perhaps because of a lack of capacity. cases are also passed from one department to another within the same police force kept pending in this way with no action being taken. there may well be a thb team in a police force but it may have been allocated to so many thb investigations that the team s available investigative capacity is exceeded. this all results in stagnation backlogs and dismissal by the police in some cases. potentially important cases are also reduced more often than would be desir able to quick hit cases. it has been indicated within lem that this is partly the result of the they go under different names. there are for example thb intervention teams prostitution control teams and commercial practices teams. the board of procurators general has clearly indicated that as long as no decision has been taken to transfer a case or as long as there is still not enough information available to make a decision on the matter the responsibility for dealing with any observed manifestation of organised crime remains with whoever first observes it. this is designed to avoid a failure to act because a case actually belongs somewhere else public prosecutions service p. . the fact that thb is often a national phenomenon victims put to work throughout the whole country or an international one victims coming from abroad may well lead to greater uncertainty on this point than with some other offences. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur performance contracts that have been concluded which contain agreements on the number of cases to be tendered to the public prosecutions service. this results in a preference for quick hit cases instead of taking on longer lasting complete thb cases. it has also been in dicated that the disbanding of the royal netherlands marechaussee goc teams means that fewer thb cases can be addressed by the police than was previously the case. according to the police public prosecutors are also sometimes too reticent about thb cases. the police officers are also often disappointed at the penalties that are demanded. the pps is undertaking research on the penalties imposed for thb. by contrast there are some police forces that invest a great deal in the fight against thb. according to the thb experts in these police forces the following factors have a positive impact and result in adequate identification of thb as well as the successful selection and completion of cases an agreement that thb can be dealt with immediately because of the gravity of the case and need not await the decision of a selection team an agreement that selection teams should always make positive decisions on thb cases an agreement that any signs of thb will always lead to the start of a police investigation even if there is no report of the crime for the time being an agreement that individuals arrested by the aliens police in connection with illegal work or residence will always be interviewed at which point attention will also be paid to any signs of thb an agreement that there will be an investment in possible victims of thb meaning that there will be proper assistance adequate reception and accurate information an agreement that women in aliens detention who might be possible victims will be visited by certificated vice investigators who will undertake a more detailed investigation good contacts with the victim assistance services a system wide approach see box below investigation of thb sneep the police initiated an investigation in into a large group of suspects involved in major league thb. two of the main suspects who are of turkish origin and their henchmen put many at least victims to work as prostitutes in various towns in the netherlands and in germany using excessive amounts of violence in the process. the investigation into this group codenamed sneep includes some progressive elements and is an example of the programmatic approach to organised crime con templated by the public prosecutions service see also chapter on this . the work is based on a bar rier model in terms of which the various barriers are distinguished that have to be overcome by indicated by the chairman of the board of procurators general in an interview with de volkskrant february . visiting all women appeared to take up too much capacity. according to r. hopkins interview with de volkskrant february this was the group of perpetrators described at length in her book ik laat je nooit meer gaan i ll never let you go again . she alleged that the police had already investigated this group back in but that the investigation was closed. investigation criminals in order to introduce victims to prostitution see chapter . the investigation involves col laboration between various bodies with each investigating the appropriate barrier. in addition to the various police forces there is thus also involvement on the part of the royal netherlands mare chaussee siod ind customs and the municipalities. the public prosecutions service is coordinat ing the investigation and directing the various services. the investigation is being assisted and evalu ated scientifically. a lot of information is collected through tapping and observation article aggre gation described later in this section because many of the victims dare not provide official statements. financial investigation is also undertaken with facilitators witting or unwitting accom plices being included in the investigation. because the victims were also put to work in the licensed sex industry the intention is also to tackle the operators in question in terms of administrative law. at the time of writing this report the investigation is still in full swing. investigation of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry the investigation of thb with a view to labour exploitation is still in its infancy. there are however investigations going on in various regional police forces. in one investiga tion into exploitation in another sector than the sex industry in a prosecution and convic tion at first instance. in this investigation the police collaborated with the siod. the siod co initiated seven investigations into thb for exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry in one of which was successfully concluded in . the other six investigations were either completed successfully or discontinued in . in that year the siod commenced five investigations into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. these investigations were still in the operational stages at the time of writing this report. the national public prosecutor s office for economic and environmental offences fp is charged with directing special investigation services such as the siod in thb cases. it is also this office which determines whether a case should be taken up and whether it should be taken up as a thb case. the comments from the police that public prosecutors are some times too reticent in relation to thb cases were echoed by the siod in relation to the fp. investigation using article aggregation it often happens that thb victims do not dare to report the crime or are unwilling to do so.nrm if they do it often comes down to the word of the suspects against the word of the victims. this can complicate thb cases. using a working method in terms of which all of the established facts from the police and also from third parties are aggregated it is sometimes still possible to obtain sufficient proof of the crime in these cases. three suspects were brought before the district court of s hertogenbosch by applying this aggregation this was an investigation into illegal employment of bulgarians in hemp picking in very poor conditions and circumstances. the district court in the hague held that exploitation had not been proved see also chapters and . an investigation by siod is successfully completed if it results in an official report. the siod completed a total of investigations in with of these relating principally to organised illegal employment siod p. . sources van der wegen lem emm. the term refers to article of the dutch criminal code. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur method and without the victims having reported the offence or made an incriminating statement. all three cases related to loverboys with victims who did not feel as if they were victims and who were too fond of their pimp to want to make incriminating statements. in two of the three cases the suspects were nonetheless convicted of thb. the evidence that was led focused on witness statements by third parties and tapped telephone conversations. this type of investigation requires an investment from police and the pps. the police for in stance indicated that a case without a report of the crime takes more time than a case with such a report. it involves for example dealing with an unwilling victim in order to find out which witnesses should be approached or tapped and to collect sufficient supporting evi dence. emm is making efforts to bring this method to the attention of police forces and to train police officers in its application. . investigations the data bnrm police study this section contains some of the core data in relation to all of the thb investigations suc cessfully completed in and the number of victims who reported an offence of thb registered in . up to bnrm annually listed the number of successfully concluded investigations and reported on the characteristics of these cases. two developments involving the police pro vided reason for discontinuing this practice. first of all the police have to prepare twice a year a crime projection analysis criminaliteitsbeeldanalyse cba for each of the six priority points in the fight against organised crime including thb . the first full cbas are ex pected to appear in . secondly lem is producing a thb police force monitor in . as with the earlier po lice force monitornmr this will provide an overview of the state of affairs in relation to the fight against thb and the bottlenecks arising as a result. the existence of the cbas for thb and the police force monitor has eliminated the need to continue the bnrm police research in its old format. it has been decided for this and other reasons that the bnrm will only undertake additional research into topics that are of cur rent interest. because the publication of the cbas and the police force monitor is planned for the information they contain cannot yet be processed in this report. emm has however provided a list of the number of submitted reports of thb by victims and wit nesses at the request of bnrm. the results are presented in this section. as instructed by the board of procurators general. investigation . . investigations into thb table . contains an overview of the number of thb investigations concluded and submit ted to the pps each year categorised according to cross border or domestic thb or a combination of the two. for cross border thb victims are recruited abroad and for domestic thb they are re cruited in the netherlands. in all the cases they are exploited for among other things pros titution purposes in the netherlands. the number of cases involving a combination of these forms of thb and involving recruitment of victims both in the netherlands and abroad in creased in . table . accordingly includes for the first time a separate category for this. table . investigations into thb completed each year according to thb type year cross border thb domestic thb combined total n index n index n index n index total the number of successfully concluded investigations into thb achieved an all time high in following a relative slump in . the number of investigations into domestic thb in particular showed a marked increase both in absolute and relative terms. three of the investigations related to a combination of domestic and cross border thb. type of sex work the research also covered the type of sex work undertaken by victims of thb. in all of the investigations that were concluded in this concerned prostitution. this was some times combined with other work in sex entertainment such as pole dancing or striptease but none of the investigated cases were confined to this type of sex entertainment. the vic tims were used to produce pornography in three cases but again this was combined with working in the prostitution sector. the investigations were carried out by the police and the royal netherlands marechaussee. a single investigation may relate to several suspects. cross border thb may also relate to the recruitment of individuals in the netherlands for exploitation abroad. percentage of investigations into domestic thb per annum relative to the total number of investigations into thb in that year and . this was also the case in . this fact is relevant because the punishable nature of thb was extended by the legislative amendment in to cover exploitation for a third party for example exploitation in the sex entertainment and pornography industries. it now seems that in practice no thb cases have been completed where the victims were exclusively exploited in those sectors. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur specific characteristics of the completed thb cases while there was no systematic inquiry about this specific characteristics of the cases that had been listed sometimes cropped up in the interviews. for example it transpired that one case had been re ported by a client and one by an operator of a sex business. various victims as it transpired in three of the investigations not only had to undertake sex work but also had to conclude loans or undertake debts with only the suspects deriving any profit from this. . . victims reports by victims in table . reflects the number of victims who reported an offence or provided a statement in the investigations that were submitted to the pps. victims who reported an offence but whose cases were not dealt with or completed are therefore not reflected here. cases com bining domestic and cross border thb are by analogy with the methodology used in pre vious yearsnrm allocated according to the predominant type of thb that had been com mitted. table . reports and witness statements made by victims in thb investigations sent to the pps per annum and type of thb year cross border thb domestic thb total n average n average n average total substantially more investigations were concluded successfully in than in previous years but there was a decline in the average number of victims reporting an offence or a the underlying principle here was where most victims were recruited. in the combination cases from and see table . this occurred in the netherlands whereas the combination cases from involved mainly recruitment abroad. this therefore makes the numbers of investigations into domestic thb for each year and total . the numbers of investigations into cross border thb for each year are and total . standard deviation and n . and . and . and . and . and total respectively. standard deviation and n . and . and . and . and . and total respectively. standard deviation and n . and . and . and . and . and total respectively. investigation witness statement for each investigation. this decline can largely be attributed to the in crease in the number of investigations into domestic thb during that year. generally speak ing fewer victims were involved in these cases van dijk . underage victims table . reflects the number of underage victims detected in concluded investigations di vided according to the year when the investigations were concluded and the type of thb. table . underage victims in thb investigations sent to the pps per annum and type of thb year cross border thb domestic thb total n average n average n average total in the investigations in minors were found of whom reported the offence. the figures for were victims of whom reported an offence. this increase for can be explained partly by the increase in the number of investigations in that year but the average number of underage children per investigation also increased in at least in those investigations involving cross border thb. for investigations into domestic thb the average number of minor victims identified was slightly less than in the previous year. this may be because as is often suggested loverboys wait until girls are before introducing them to the licensed sex industry.nrm reports of thb in at the request of bnrm emm prepared a listing of the number of reports of thb submit ted to the police in . where this was not possible information on this issue was ob tained from the stv. this has allowed us to confirm the minimum number of reports of thb submitted to the police. the total in was . not all of these reports were made by victims with at least nine of them being submitted by witnesses. they did not necessarily reported a crime or provide a witness statement. this information was only gathered from the year onwards. standard deviation and n . and . and . en total respectively. standard deviation and n . and . and . and total respectively. standard deviation and n . en . and . and total respectively. the listing does not include statements by the victim witnesses. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . international developments both the police and the pps are involved in international cooperation to combat cross border crime. this is of particular relevance in the fight against cross border thb. international police cooperation service the international police cooperation service dienst internationale politiesamenwerking dinpol becomes involved as soon as an investigation includes collaboration with a for eign investigation service. it becomes the hub for the exchange of information on the inves tigation between domestic and foreign based investigation bodies. the aim of the dinpol brokerage function is to ease as far as possible the exchange of police information via re quests for mutual legal assistance . international legal assistance centres there are six international legal assistance centres internationale rechtshulpcentra irc in the netherlands. they play a supportive role for incoming and outgoing requests for legal assistance and also provide qualitative support and expertise in the field of international le gal assistance including police cooperation and cooperation between judicial authorities. because the ircs are obliged to record every request for legal assistance this also means that applications have to pass through the ircs even if the police or public prosecutor al ready has his or her own network which is mainly the case with police certainly in border areas . national crime squad the national crime squad nationale recherche nr has an important duty in dealing with complicated international requests for legal assistance and provides capacity for inter national collaborative ventures such as joint investigation teams. joint investigation team in its efforts aimed at an international approach to organised trans national crime the european council created a facility for setting up a joint investigation team jit .nrm preparations were put in hand in for setting up a jit to investigate thb from bul garia. this jit project was halted in before an operational jit could even be set up. sources include perspectief op om politie in ontwikkeling. visie op de politiefunctie prospects for om police under development. views on the function of the police views on the function of the police project group and council of chief police officers and the policy agenda www.rege ring.nl . the service corresponds through five communication channels the netherlands branch of interpol europol bureau sirene the dutch liaison officers abroad and the foreign liaison officers in the netherlands. liaison officers provide support for investigations undertaken by the dutch police and pps on foreign soil. the dutch liaison officers based abroad have counterparts in the netherlands. source rijken lem. participating countries apart from the netherlands include belgium germany the united kingdom and at a later stage bulgaria. investigation the most significant reasons for its termination were gaps in the legislation in the participat ing countries and the absence of a suitable thb case for the jit to focus on. the organisa tional structure was also too complex. experience gained during this jit project will be available to use if a choice is made to pursue investigation via a jit at some point in future. another jit into drug smuggling was continued however and resulted in the conviction of a suspect in the netherlands. the defence argued in this case that the public prosecu tor s case was not admissible for prosecution because the jit itself and the information ob tained from it were both unlawful. the court did not agree. europol europol has prepared an analysis of frequently occurring organised crime and current criminal networks in europe. the results are set out in the report entitled eu organised crime threat assessment octa . the octa is designed to provide a basis for estab lishing strategic eu priorities and forms an important step towards an information driven approach to organised crime at the european level. priorities have been set within the council of the european union in relation to the octa. thb is one of them. the neth erlands has also proposed in this context to start targeting thb more emphatically in its in ternational collaborative endeavours with other member states. thb in the octa in addition to ethnic albanian organisations the octa mainly identifies romanian and bulgarian organisations as being involved with thb. it also reports that chinese criminal organisations are fa cilitating illegal immigration and are involved in the systematic exploitation of individuals for em ployment and sexual purposes. thb principally concentrating on sexual exploitation is said to be the second most frequently occurring activity for criminal organisations and second only to drugs. thb requires a complex organisation and is associated with facilitative offences such as document forgery. criminal organisations specialising in the forgery of documents are sometimes deeply involved in people smuggling and thb. the octa has established that criminal organisations are often active not only in the criminal underworld but also set up legal businesses to use for the partial deployment of their criminal activities. for example criminal organisations involved in thb operate travel agen cies temporary employment agencies or theatre agencies. violence is an intrinsic feature of thb al the participating countries were the netherlands and the united kingdom. rotterdam district court verdict of august ljn ay . this is the first report based on a new operating method in terms of which the emphasis is on a future oriented qualitative assessment of organised crime in europe. earlier europol reports mainly described the existing situation in quantitative terms . this working method results from agreements reached within the hague pro gramme. the six priorities in organised crime are . drug trading specifically synthetic drugs . thb and illegal immigration meaning people smuggling . fraud . forgery of euros . product counterfeit and theft of intellectual property and . money laundering. a number of points for attention have also been formulated for four geographical areas. these include thb and people smuggling for south east europe. the netherlands in the atlantic region is associated in particular with the battle against synthetic drugs. a final and general point for attention relates to transportation centres such as seaports and airports which act as conduits into and out of europe for the trade in goods principally drugs. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur beit that thb can also occur without the use of extreme violence. reputation or appearances may mean that threats of violence are enough. international collaboration between border areas police districts on the border also collaborate directly with the neighbouring countries of germany belgium and luxembourg. the aim is to tackle crime manifesting itself in these border areas on a joint basis. for the first time in history thb and people smuggling have been prioritised in one of these collaborative ventures nebedeagpol . the opportunities for forming this type of collaboration were expanded in and respectively with the ratification of the benelux convention on cross border police activity and the convention between the netherlands and germany on cross border police cooperation and coopera tion in criminal matters . further improvements to the collaborative effort can be antici pated when the convention of pr m is ratified. . points of attention and bottlenecks this section contains an overview of points for attention and bottlenecks in the field of de tecting thb which have been mentioned previously and those arising from information al ready presented. policy and organisation in practice unlike at the policy level thb is not a matter of priority for every police force. the public prosecutions service sometimes appears to be too reticent in relation to thb cases. lem is proceeding with a new organisational structure. one element of this is that unlike the previous situation not every police force will be represented at all of the meet ings but most of the meetings will be attended only by those forces who are playing a pio neering part. because this implies that police forces who are tackling thb less intensively in arbeidsgesellschaft nebedeagpol with germany and belgium and in kodag nort and kodag mitte with germany . convention between the kingdom of the netherlands the kingdom of belgium and the grand duchy of luxembourg on cross border police activity luxembourg june no. effective from . . treaties series. . convention between the kingdom of the netherlands and the federal republic of germany on cross border police cooperation and cooperation in criminal matters enschede march . no. treaties series. ratified on . . but not yet in force. the convention between certain states on the stepping up of cross border collaboration particularly in combating terrorism cross border crime and illegal migration convention of pr m t.s. offers opportunities in particular for an intensified approach to cross border crime. this convention will for example allow for the immediate comparison of an individual dna profile with dna profiles from the computer databases of the other associated member states with a view to assisting in identification and investigation. the same facility will be available for fingerprints and vehicle registers. the convention was signed by the netherlands in may . investigation will be less likely to encounter this topic as often except when actively involved in investi gations there is a danger of them falling further behind. emm is dependent for its operation on information provided by the police forces and third parties. this information is not supplied effectively enough by all of the parties con cerned. on the other hand emm is not yet successfully fulfilling its allocated duties. police forces must continually make choices as to how capacity is allocated. such choices do not always favour the fight against thb. administrative enforcement of the prostitu tion sector also uses up capacity and this is not universally supported by the municipali ties as has been agreed. the result is that indications of thb are not investigated in certain cases and investigations are limited to quick hit cases. police housekeeping in relation to information is a recognised point of concern. tackling thb also suffers because of the technical obstacles to an exchange of information. this accordingly costs needlessly high capacity because of the multiplicity of systems used occasionally resulting in the matter being abandoned. however technically perfect infor mational housekeeping is exactly what is needed to tackle the offence of thb which is of ten cross regional. despite all of the foundations being in place international cooperation in the investigation of these offences has as yet scarcely got off the ground. despite proposals to this effect in the additional measures for the nam there has not as yet been any check on what activities might be useful in the field of thb for exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry to ensure an increase in the number of people report ing indications of this type of exploitation while contacts have only been sought with a limited number of new chain partners who can identify signs of this type of thb see also . . . identification and investigation in order to adequately identify indications of thb it is important for both citizens and employees in all branches of those organisations that might have to deal with thb to know what thb is and to be able to recognise victims. there is still a long way to go be fore this goal is achieved see also . . . the police do not always submit reports of thb to the pps contrary to the terms of the thb guidelines. when disposing of illegal employment cases by means of an administrative penalty there is a hidden risk as far as tackling thb is concerned that no more detailed investigation will be undertaken apart from a penalty report with an associated chance that the ai might be receiving and passing on limited amounts of information about abuse in illegal employment situations. financial investigations . introduction one of the subject areas to which bnrm has applied its available research capacity is that of financial investigations . human traffickers can earn substantial amounts of money from their criminal activities. information is necessary in order to be able to confiscate these amounts and this can be obtained by ensuring that investigations are not only tactical but also financial. in addition financial investigations can provide additional evidence and a more detailed understanding of criminal organisations. financial information can also con tribute to obtaining compensation for victims. at the same time bnrm established that the police and the public prosecution service pps devote too little attention to financial in vestigations and confiscation.nrm this chapter contains the research results in relation to financial investigations in cases of trafficking in human beings thb confiscation and compensation payable to victims. the explanation of the research methods used can be found in appendix . the research only covers information in relation to exploitation in the sex industry. subjects dealt with include the concepts financial investigations illegally obtained profits and confiscation a number of developments in terms of policy relating to financial investi gations and confiscation and the research findings on financial investigations illegally ob tained profits and confiscation. attention is also paid to the issue of compensation for vic tims. . financial investigations illegally obtained profits and confiscation . . what is financial investigation while there is a range of definitions of financial investigation there is also a reasonable de gree of consensus about its main characteristics and usefulness. financial investigation relates to the deployment of financial expertise in a criminal investigation in order to collect and analyse financial information. certain information becomes more significant if looked at from the perspective of finan cial expertise. in practice financial investigations involve being alert during an investigation to information concerning cash and cash flows goods and services supplied and collecting this information actively preferably from the start of the investigation. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur financial investigation is not a new investigative method but a different way of looking at and thinking about information. the usefulness of financial investigation goes beyond the enabling of an easier confiscation of any illegally obtained profits. financial investigation can also provide additional evidence of criminal activities and can therefore be of use in prosecution of suspects. carrying out financial investigations also po tentially offers a greater understanding of the size of a criminal network the new suspects who may be involved the legal sectors involved the hierarchy of a criminal network crimi nal operating methods and particular types of crime hoogenboom et al. van kop pen nelen sabee secherling nelen pheijffer et al . financial investigation is not confined to financial economic offences but can be applied to many areas of crime. financial investigations are often associated with the battle against financial economic crime such as fraud and money laundering hoogenboom et al. faber van nunen . they can also be applied however when combating other offences. . . what are illegally obtained profits illegally obtained profits represent the amount by which an individual s assets are increased as a result of a criminal offence. this can be calculated in two different ways either on a transactional basis or via a cash position asset comparison. the transactional basis involves establishing what financial returns for the suspect s each criminal activity has produced. in a cash position asset comparison to put it briefly opening assets and lawful income are compared with expenses and closing assets on the date of arrest whereby unaccountable expenditures and assets may be established and possibly classified as illegally obtained prof its. in matters involving thb calculation on a transactional basis is frequently used. in such cases it is calculated how much a victim paid to the human trafficker s and this informa tion can also be used by the victim when she claims compensation. the cash position asset comparison however also has advantages for example in cases where the police can only confirm some of the victims or some of the thb activities that have been committed. in such cases calculation on a transactional basis might provide a serious under estimate of the actual criminal profits. in confiscation cases there is no need for any precise knowledge of what the perpetrators have earned from their criminal activities. the illegally obtained profits can be estimated. such estimates have to be substantiated of course and must be prepared as carefully as pos sible. if a reasoned calculation of the enrichment has been made based on lawful evidence it along with any interest received on such an increase in assets consequential profit . the illegally obtained profits can also represent the amount by which assets are not diminished arising from cost savings. this is the case for example when victims are unwilling or unable to provide a statement or cannot be found this happens relatively frequently. financial investigation is up to the party concerned to refute the calculation. the court can reallocate the burden of proof between the public prosecutor and the party concerned. establishing or estimating illegally obtained profits is not always straightforward. there fre quently is a lack of information. it is apparent from case law that data covering a limited part of the period when the crimes were committed can be extrapolated to the entire period. in thb cases this means that if it is known what a victim earned in one month this amount can be multiplied by the total number of months during which she was exploited. . . what is confiscation confiscation is the deprivation of illegally obtained profits. a public prosecutor must indi cate during the trial whether or not a claim for confiscation is being lodged. the confiscation claim itself must be made within two years after the verdict at first instance in the underlying criminal case. the confiscation claim is dealt with in separate proceedings so not within the original criminal proceedings . the court can impose a confiscation order on the con victed party obliging him or her to pay the illegally obtained profits to the state. the confis cation is based on article e dutch criminal code. the following decisions are made at the confiscation hearing establishing which offences have resulted in illegally obtained profits estimating the amount of the enrichment calculation of the illegally obtained profits determining the size of the obligation for payment. the court may order a more detailed financial investigation. appeal and cassation can be in timated against the verdict on confiscation itself. when establishing the illegally obtained profits the court must take into account any judi cially established claim by a disadvantaged third party. various studies show a significant discrepancy between the amount of illegally obtained profits claimed and the amount actually imposed by the courts meloen et al. svb forensic business ex perts investigators . one possible factor here is that the courts not only have to estimate the illegally obtained profits but also have to establish the amount that the party concerned must pay to the state and this latter amount is partly determined by his ability to pay. it also appears that the courts find it difficult to pass sentence on the accused in both the criminal prosecution and the confiscation information in this section is based on the confiscation practice book praktijkboek ontneming punt and the confiscation manual leerboek ontneming police academy unless otherwise stated. the obligation to pay a sum of money to the state representing confiscation of illegally obtained profits can even be imposed if the party concerned was not convicted for the offence giving rise to the enrichment. in such cases there have to be enough indications that he did commit the offence. in practice however confiscation generally follows a conviction. confiscation is only possible if the estimated illegally obtained profit amounts to or more. but it is possible to deal with the confiscation case immediately after the prosecution. the disadvantaged third party is someone who has suffered direct disadvantage i.e. a victim. as it happens this cannot always be implemented in practice because of problems of sequencing. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur proceedings because imposing a confiscation sanction is viewed as an accumulation of punishments svb forensic business experts investigators . veldhuijzen points out that the public prosecutor frequently reduces the claim at the hearing. the amount ultimately confiscated is often lower still primarily because only a small percentage of the claims are secured by a pre judgment seizure of property verrest buruma . van de bunt points out that problems surrounding confiscation are not unique to the netherlands. execution of a confiscation sanction commences once it has become irrevocable and is delegated to the central judicial collection bureau centraal justitieel incasso bureau cjib . if there are concurrent claims the sequence of execution gives preference to the claim by the victim article f dutch criminal code followed by the monetary fine and then any con fiscation sanction that may have been imposed. it is not unusual for a few years to pass be tween the start of the police investigation and an initial letter from the cjib to the accused. this is because confiscation can only take place once the verdicts in both the confiscation case and the underlying criminal prosecution have become irrevocable. a criminal s assets may be affected in ways other than a confiscation sanction. the ones of relevance to thb are monetary fine. a monetary fine of the fifth category can be imposed for committing thb the maximum here is since the start of . there is not necessary that the crime has resulted in any enrichment. settlement. without the involvement of the court the public prosecution service can enter into a set tlement with the accused for payment of a sum of money or transfer of property to the state representing full or partial confiscation of the estimated illegally obtained profits. this would be followed by a prosecution but not by a confiscation case. this can be of in terest to the public prosecutor if for example it proves impossible to establish the where abouts of the suspect s assets. declaration of forfeiture. property can be declared forfeit if it is directly related to the offence that has been commit ted. this would for example include property acquired as a result of the criminal offence. financial benefits from criminal offences are not available for forfeiture declarations. they are supposed to be appropriated through confiscation. forfeiture declarations are applied relatively infrequently nelen sabee . obligation for payment to the victim compensation order . the court can oblige the convicted party to pay the state a certain sum for the benefit of the victim article f dutch criminal code . the compensation sanction is explained in greater detail in chapter victims . targeting criminals via the tax administration is an alternative to confiscation. the advan tages and disadvantages of this are discussed in . . . financial investigation . national policy developments in the area of financial investigations and confiscation . . developments in the area of financial investigations increasing interest in confiscation and financial investigations interest in confiscating the proceeds of crime showed a marked increase from the end of the s early s. the statutory support for this was refined and extended. the financial investigations project directed by the financial investigations steering group was set up in with the remit of making financial investigations an integral element of the en forcement system. the project ended after five years with the results being described as disappointing faber van nunen p. . respondents from the police and the pps in particular felt that in practice financial investi gation is equated too much with the battle against financial economic crime. while it is clear that financial investigations form a valuable addition to the existing set of instruments this has not yet permeated to the police shop floor according to faber and van nunen p. . financial investigation expert group the dutch police initiated the financial investigation expert group in . the expert group also aims to make financial investigations an integral element of the enforcement system and the standard investigation process. financial investigations have to become a standard component of every police investigation. reporting of unusual transactions since the introduction of the reporting of unusual transactions act wet melding ongebrui kelijke transacties wet mot in institutions are obliged to report unusual transac tions to the centre for reporting unusual transactions meldpunt ongebruikelijke transac ties . those obliged to submit reports include financial service providers such as banks in surance companies and financial transaction offices as well as casinos traders in high value property and certain professional bodies such as lawyers and estate agents . a transaction is unusual if it fulfils one or more of the criteria on an official list of criteria. the number of unusual transactions classified as suspicious and referred to the police in amounted to of the total number of reports . these transactions involved . billion euros. financial investigations in thb cases the human trafficking instruction indicates that financial investigation should be a standard element of investigations into thb. the national expert group on trafficking in human beings landelijke expertgroep mensenhandel lem also wants to encourage financial in source ministry of finance website www.minfin.nl . the mot office was subsumed within the financial intelligence unit fiu nl on january this is part of the klpd. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur vestigation in thb cases. a manual on financial investigations in thb cases was developed for this purpose in containing standard questions and forms focusing specifically on the offence of thb. . . developments in the area of confiscation the pps has applied a proactive policy on confiscation since . the possibilities for re covering criminal assets were substantially extended in with the introduction of the liberalisation of asset transactions act wet verruiming vermogenstransacties article e dutch criminal code . in the long range plan entitled prospects for the pps indicates that the legislation on confiscation has not yet proved to be an outright success and it announces some improve ment measures. svb forensic business experts investigators looked into how the confiscation legislation works in practice. the result was a summary of factors of success and failure coincided with the fac tors mentioned in earlier publications.nrm one factor was that the police and public prosecution ser vice prioritise the underlying offence. confiscation does not yet have a clear position in the investiga tion and prosecution processes. the focus on confiscation also diminishes as soon as the investigation of the underlying offence has been completed. the result is that financial investigators are brought in too late or are not involved in tactical consultations. it also implies that often too little attention is paid at the planning stages for investigations to what is required for confiscation. furthermore it appears that investigations for confiscation without any realistic chance of success are prolonged for too long a time period. the claims submitted to the courts are sometimes not suffi ciently clear. there is a lack of expertise and capacity among all of the parties concerned. it also hap pens that financial investigators are instructed to do work that could be done just as well by tactical in vestigators and they are not always well managed. the confiscation standard in february the chairman of the board of procurators general informed the chief public prosecutors that a claim for confiscation should in principle be lodged in any case worthy of confiscation involving the more serious offences which include thb cases. more recent plans propose efforts to limit confiscation to major cases that are dealt with by confiscation prosecutors with higher monetary fines in the more minor cases. this latter so lution is more straightforward and imposes less of a burden on the financial investigation capacity of the police and the special investigation services. new confiscation instruction the board of procurators general issued a new confiscation instruction effective from march . this instructions also considers the position of disadvantaged third parties if this was based on four major and four lesser confiscation cases. financial investigation there are illegally obtained profits and there is a disadvantaged third party the pps should in principle always lodge a claim for confiscation. boom the pps criminal assets confiscation bureau bureau ontnemingswetgeving openbaar min isterie boom was founded in . the duties of boom include the development of ex pertise for the pps the provision of advice and support to individual public prosecutors in relation to confiscation cases and policy oriented support for the board of procurators general. international confiscation criminals also conceal their assets abroad for example in countries where legislation and organisation in relation to confiscation is not yet particularly advanced. seizing these assets is patently important in the battle against crime but it is not straightforward. though there is adequate political support for this topic at both national and international level few posi tive developments can yet be seen in terms of implementation moors borgers . boom has indicated that it wants to focus more on international confiscation and with this in mind has jointly set up the camden asset recovery inter agency network carin an informal network of experts on confiscation from countries who can be consulted in cases where foreign assets have to be recovered. . results of bnrm police study financial investigations . . financial detection methods table . provides an overview of financial detection methods used so far as known among the respondents in the successfully completed police investigations into thb in . table . financial detection methods in thb police investigations detection methods n financial detection methods n van n of all in vestigations interview suspect s interview suspects about income expenses possessions interview victim s interview victims about income proceeds search of premises pay attention to financial information if the disadvantaged third party lodges a personal civil claim with the civil court and this is at least equivalent to the calculated illegally obtained profits then a confiscation claim is not submitted. in the event that the disadvantaged third party proceeds with a civil claim then as far as possible information should be provided to the disadvantaged third party to support his or her civil claim. if the illegally obtained profits are larger than the disadvantage suffered by the third party the balance is claimed by way of confiscation. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur telephone tap focus on financial information in tapped conversations interview witness es interview witnesses about financial informa tion continuously pay attention to cash flows audit of suspects payment transactions collect financial information abroad in the majority of the cases see the final column the suspects and victims were asked finan cial questions and there was a continuing watchfulness for cash flows. it is also clear that a search or telephone tap was not always used but when it was a large majority of these cases also involved scrutiny of financial information see second last column . interviews of wit nesses on financial aspects as well as checking on suspects payment transactions occurred in almost half of the cases. collecting financial information from abroad occurred relatively infrequently. the investigative methods mentioned above will be discussed in greater detail below. interviews of suspects those suspected of thb generally either insist on their right to remain silent or deny that they have committed the offence thus giving nothing away about the relevant financial as pects. if they admit having received money they generally claim that the victims gave them the money voluntarily. still there are good reasons for putting financial questions to sus pects. in some investigations the suspects did provide statements. sometimes this did not happen until the suspect was confronted with unexplained assets or other evidence of the al leged offence such as duplicate financial records. interviews with victims interviewing the victim is often one of the first elements in a thb investigation. it provides an initial picture of how the offence was committed and who the possible perpetrators might be. questions on financial aspects can also be posed. a number of questions are in cluded for this purpose in the manual on financial investigations in human trafficking cases handleiding financieel rechercheren in mensenhandelzaken issued by the national hu man trafficking expert group lem . financial questions to victims of thb to assist in calculating the financial profit how many women are working or have worked for the suspect who are these women what are their names where do they live etc so far as we are aware financial questions were put to suspects in investigations. in of these cases the suspect denied involvement or failed to cooperate and in of them the suspect provided a statement albeit sometimes brief . in of the investigations information was no longer available on what had been disclosed in the financial interview of the suspect. financial investigation timeline how long has the situation been going on preferably as accurate as possible with definite dates until when did the situation continue how many days a week did the woman work did the woman also work during her monthly periods did she work throughout the entire period or was there a holiday break how many days did the woman work in total earnings how many hours on average did the woman work each day how many clients on average did the woman have each day were any records kept for example notes or text messages on how many clients she had each day what were the average earnings per client what were the average earnings per day is this figure net excluding the costs of rooms condoms lingerie etc or gross with these costs still to be deducted what proportion did she have to hand over or did she have to hand over the whole amount when and how did she have to make these payments could she use the remaining money herself was it kept by someone or somewhere what did she do with it how did she spend it bank deposits which bank how much in total did the victim earn for the suspect or pay to him costs what did the costs amount to each day room rental... per day or part condoms... per day etc who paid these costs did the suspect incur any other costs for example hiring someone for protection to pass on mes sages to supervise matters other does the suspect have income apart from his prostitution income such as social benefits drug deal ing income etc is it known what the suspect did or bought with the earnings he received does the suspect have any assets house car bank balance cash and where are they source the national human trafficking expert group manual for financial investigations in human trafficking cases . the questions are aimed at calculating the illegally obtained profits. some of them can also be put to suspects. the bnrm study seems to show that it is extremely important to ask these questions. in investigations the statement of the victim s sometimes in combination with other infor mation allowed for a calculation of the illegally obtained profits. in nine investigations where there was a financial gain and the victims were also questioned extensively on the sub ject this was not the case. sometimes the victims were unable to provide a statement they as far as the other cases are concerned no illegally obtained profits was disclosed no or insufficient questions were asked about illegally obtained profits it could not be established what questions if any were asked or what victims said about the matter or the victims did not want to make a statement or an official report . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur no longer remembered the information or could not reproduce it occasionally because of addiction and sometimes they did not want to do so for example from fear of the conse quences or because of a special attachment to the trafficker loverboy . in a few cases inter viewing victims on the financial aspects of the case was also important for evidential pur poses and for assessing the suspect s asset position. search of premises when a search took place this quite often led to assets or information about them and or other valuable financial information. these assets included money valuables or other pointers towards assets such as bank account numbers bank statements and evidence of money transfers. the discovery of assets is also important because a pre trial seizure can also be imposed on them as a precursor to confiscation see . . . in six investigations duplicate financial records were found during searches showing amongst other matters which women or victims had worked at which times and the profit derived from them. such a discovery is of major significance it provides considerable in sight the illegally obtained profits can be deduced from it and it can be used as hard evi dence in a prosecution and or confiscation case. taps in most investigations technical considerations regarding evidence play a part in the decision to tap telephone conversations the intention is to demonstrate thb for example through coercion . at the same time financial information is picked up certainly if a financial expert is involved in the investigation. tapping brought to the surface useful financial information generally on the suspect s assets in a range of investigations. telephone conversations be tween suspects and victims sometimes dealt with profits and costs incurred. it is through tapping that the ban on tolerating the transit of persons in cases that have been identified as thb makes itself felt if the taps show that thb is going on immediate inter vention is necessary in order to remove the victims from the situation. this is sometimes a factor in deciding whether or not and how to deploy this method when thb is sus pected. witness interviews witness interviews normally play a prominent part in investigations. witnesses of thb are rather difficult to find however partly because victims are often kept in social isolation and also conceal their suffering. in cases where information was indeed successfully collected from witnesses or informants this concerned for example information required to calcu late the illegally obtained profits or the involuntary payment of money. in nine out of the investigations in which a search took place during which attention was paid to financial information the results are not known. searches produced valuable financial pointers in of the investigations but not in others. financial investigation auditing payment transactions the auditing of suspects payment transactions generally occurs in cases involving a more intensive financial investigation. in these investigations information is requested from fi nancial institutions particularly banks in relation to the products and services purchased by the suspect. two possible aims of auditing payment transactions are to gain an understanding of a the cash flows and b the asset position of the suspect s . the suspect s payment transactions were audited in investigations and the results are known. in nine of these cases there was nothing to show no suspicious cash flows were found and the suspects appeared not to have any significant assets in a dutch bank account. various respondents indicated that in the prostitution industry funds tend to be cash and never end up being held by financial in stitutions. in six of the investigations however this investigative work revealed that money had been transferred abroad see more on this at . . . reasons for not auditing payment transactions were that it takes long and it is time consuming. it was frequently said that this would only be worthwhile if the anticipated prof its were substantial. this was not often the situation in the investigated cases. collecting financial information from abroad financial information was collected abroad in seven of the investigations. in many more in vestigations however indications of cash flows going abroad or assets held abroad were found. this means that not in all cases appropriate investigative methods were applied. this point will be explored in the following section. . . collaboration and information exchange the pps is in charge of the investigation including the financial element. the leaders of in vestigation teams were asked how collaboration in this area actually worked. inquiries were also made about potential other collaborating agencies including the tax administration and the social information and investigation service sociale inlichtingen en opsporingsdi enst siod . the matters explored include the experience of collaborating with these bod ies as well as the cases in which collaboration with foreign partners was sought. public prosecution service the respondents were divided about the directive role of and collaboration with the pps in the financial field. thus in addition to some positive points it was indicated that the pps wants to achieve targets and is therefore unwilling to invest in lengthy financial investiga in a relatively large proportion of investigations it was not possible within the available time frame to find out what the results of the audit had been. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur tions or does not act according to the principle set out in the confiscation instructions that a claim for confiscation should be lodged if the minimum estimate of the enrichment is . tax administration the investigations were contact was made with the tax administration involved asking for information or providing information so that the suspect s could be made subject to an assessment by the tax administration. the latter usually happens if the financial investiga tion could not be completed successfully but it is considered undesirable that the accused can simply walk away in financial terms . when imposing assessments on criminals the tax administration regularly uses financial information from police investigations van der wegen . the benefit of confiscation by fiscal means is its speed. a tax assessment prepared on the basis of police information can in principle be imposed immediately and collected within two or three days. this is possible for up to five years after the end of the relevant fiscal year even up to years for income from abroad whereas in the case of confiscation proceed ings this only has to be instigated within two years after a conviction has been pronounced. also because of its permanent relationship with citizens the tax administration has a wider overview of the financial wheelings and dealings of suspects. and it is possible to charge tax on activities for which a suspect was acquitted in a criminal case. the tax ad ministration also has greater powers to compel suspects to provide information on their in come and assets. it can also reverse the burden of proof in relation to a suspect meaning that the suspect has to account for the sources of his income assets. a tax assessment can there fore be more effective than a confiscation. but there are also some objections in principle to this option. the tax administration does not give a detailed account of the illegally ob tained profits certain countries refuse to supply information to the tax administration and it is not the purpose of the tax administration to compensate victims of a criminal of fence van der wegen . interlude the big spender projects big spender projects were started in a number of regional police forces. they aimed at criminals and troublemakers who are manifestly living above their station. enquiries are made as to how these of ten young men get hold of the wealth they flaunt so openly. the intention is to confiscate undeclared assets and by doing so to bring their allure for youngsters to a halt and discourage criminal conduct. several regional police forces have signed agreements to this effect with other bodies such as munici palities the pps the tax administration and the social security agency. siod one investigation involved collaboration with the social information and investigation ser vice sociale inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst siod . the police investigated the thb and the siod looked into whether the operators of the sex businesses where the victims had for this reason these are the countries where criminals prefer to put away their assets. financial investigation been put to work had fulfilled their obligations as employers. this turned out not to be the case and they were therefore prosecuted for employer fraud. the siod investigation also resulted in a confiscation case. both the police and the siod were pleased with regard to their collaboration on the investigation. both parties achieved better results by sharing their knowledge and understanding. also if the suspects are exonerated from thb they might still be convicted for employer fraud. hence a confiscation claim remains possible so that the operators can be targeted financially. an additional advantage was that if in a court pro ceeding it is established that the victims of thb had been in paid employment they can lodge a claim for unpaid wages. none of the victims in this case submitted a compensation or wages claim however. case study siod collaboration four human traffickers recruited women in various eastern european countries brought them to the netherlands and put them to work in several sex clubs. the clubs were run by three owners who were in league with the human traffickers. the sex club owners registered the victims with the aliens police and arranged an application for independent entrepreneur status with the help of a lawyer . the vic tims were told that they could legally work in the netherlands during the procedure which was not the case. they were also told that the operator would deal with the payment of taxes and suchlike. the sex club owners and the traffickers were convicted of human trafficking and other matters. the idea arose to also prosecute the owners for failing to fulfil their obligations as employers and it was de cided that the siod would investigate this. in consultation with the police questions about the em ployment relationship were included in the interviews of witnesses and victims. this provided a lot of information that the siod could use. for this reason permission was sought and obtained for active participation in the investigation. first of all the siod collected information showing that the sex club owners could indeed be catego rised as employers despite their steadfast defence that the victims were working in their clubs on a self employed basis. the siod succeeded in refuting this by demonstrating that there were elements of control employment and wages. to do this it used statements from the victims and the sex club owners themselves. the control element was apparent from the fact that the victims did their work on instructions and that they could not personally determine when they could stop work. the employ ment relationship was established partly by the fact that the victims were only allowed to work in the owners clubs whereas as self employed they would have to have at least two separate principals . the wages element was apparent from the fact that the client did not pay the victims but instead paid the barman in advance and that arrangements were made about the work and payments so that the victims could not themselves determine the prices . nor were the victims registered as self employed with the tax administration they did not keep their own books of account and most were not regis tered as self employed entrepreneurs with the chamber of commerce. once it had been shown that the owners of the sex clubs were in fact employers it was a simple matter to establish that they had not fulfilled their obligations as employers. thus for example no employ ment agreements were reported and no social insurance premiums were paid to the social security agency. the illegally obtained profits were established for two of the three club owners at and respectively based on the siod investigation. a confiscation claim for these amounts was lodged. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur international collaboration indications of cash flows going abroad or possessions held abroad were found in of the thb investigations. the countries where the property was situated coincided with the victims country of origin countries in central and eastern europe brazil thailand and nigeria countries of origin of the suspects turkey germany or countries with banking secrecy protected by statute luxembourg . indications of cash flows to repositories abroad or possessions held abroad did not always result in an effort to follow the cash flows or confiscate the assets. no detective work on the foreign element was undertaken in eight of the investigations. the reasons suggested for this sometimes in combination were the indications were not sufficiently concrete times the illegally obtained profits were too low to justify this sort of effort times there already was enough lawful and convincing evidence times bad experiences with the country in question times it takes up too much time with uncertain results times . seven of the investigations did involve efforts with regard to other countries than the neth erlands. in six of these investigations requests for legal assistance were issued to turkey brazil bulgaria romania thailand and germany respectively. the results varied. the fi nancial investigation in turkey got bogged down very quickly. one of the factors contribut ing to this was that the indications relating to bank accounts and real estate appeared to be inaccurate and incomplete. the other five countries collaborated well and provided the re quested financial information. a pre trial judgment seizure was imposed in one country romania on one of the suspect s cars. this car confiscated by romanian local authori ties disappeared without a trace. . . dilemmas in financial investigation in the book rechercheportret. over dilemma s in de opsporing investigation portrait. dilem mas in investigation de poot et al. provide an insight into the tactical investigation process and include an outline of the dilemmas which arise in these situations. comparable dilemmas arise in connection with the financial investigation process. the first is the choice of whether or not to start a financial investigation. then there are assessments at set points about whether or not it is justified to continue the investigation. choices also have to be made as regards which financial detection methods should be deployed. these choices are this reflects a minimum because in other investigations assets may also have been siphoned abroad. this was not always investigated by the police. this is often the case when only proof of money transfers is found. in one case no request for legal assistance was made but police specialists investigated money transfers. the results are not known. financial investigation influenced by a number of factors some of which are specific to thb. a summary and ex planation of these factors is presented here. setting targets in this study financial investigation resources were generally deployed with a view to con fiscation. no financial investigation was started if there seemed to be few prospects of a suc cessful confiscation effort. but financial investigation can still be worthwhile even in these cases for example for collecting evidence. if it can be shown that victims have passed their money on to pimps this can be used as evidence of thb. intentionally or otherwise finan cial investigation also provided evidence of the offence of thb in a relatively large propor tion of the investigations covered by the bnrm research. in addition suspects assets avail able for confiscation could sometimes be traced or financial investigation provided infor mation relating to the structure of the criminal organisation or the suspects involved. absence of concrete indications of financial evidence the absence of concrete indications concerning cash flows or assets is an accepted reason for calling a halt to a financial investigation. this is the case for example if victims and sus pects fail to provide adequate statements on the finances if money only changes hands via cash or money transfers or if for some other reason the information is limited inaccurate or incomplete. in fact in these cases the illegally obtained profits can sometimes be calculated but no more detailed investigation is made of the suspect s assets. according to financial in vestigators this latter aspect is also more difficult than establishing the illegally obtained profits. nothing can be recovered from the suspect it is said relatively often that more detailed financial investigation is only undertaken if the suspect appears to have financial assets and if there have been provable illegally obtained profits. if this is not the case the investigation is broken off or not started at all. however it is not always thoroughly investigated whether or not the suspect has assets. it is sometimes assumed that he does not because he lives in poor circumstances. the question is whether this is correct according to meloen et al. criminals sometimes live on benefit pay ments and lead a frugal and unobtrusive existence while they have siphoned off a great amount of money abroad. on the other hand van koppen for example indicates that criminals are quick to spend money so that they may not have assets per se even if they surround themselves with luxury. this seems to happen relatively frequently the suspect did not appear to have any assets in of the investigations covered by this research. a number of these investigations did include financial investigation sometimes to reach this conclusion and sometimes to achieve other aims. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur available time capacity sometimes a financial investigation is not initiated due to a lack of time or capacity. but even if the choice is made to undertake a financial investigation the lack of time or capacity may mean that it is not actually carried out. cash flows to repositories abroad cash flows going abroad or signs of them are dealt with in a range of ways. sometimes the financial investigation immediately ends there and sometimes not but then there usually is a critical consideration of the costs and benefits before a request for foreign legal assistance is made. sometimes the country involved is a factor in this consideration. for example it is known in advance that effort will be fruitless with some countries whereas assistance can easily be asked for from countries within the eu. expectations as regards the effectiveness of a request for foreign legal assistance do not for that matter always coincide with reality. one should not therefore be too ready to jump to the conclusion that it makes no sense to invest resources in relation to foreign countries. indications of cash flows to repositories abroad can actually be used to calculate the illegally obtained profits. a plan aimed at confis cation can be embarked on without the suspect s foreign asset position being clear. if nec essary additional financial investigation can be ordered in a confiscation case. ban on tolerating cases of thb the result of the ban on allowing cases of thb to continue is an occasional need for rapid intervention to remove trafficking victims from their situation. the suspects are generally also arrested immediately in these cases. the consequence is that the focus of the investiga tion team necessarily shifts towards proving the offence of thb leaving no time for preparation and implementation of a financial investigation. when the suspects and victims are asked financial questions in these cases the purpose is usually to gather additional evi dence of the commission of thb. only if the suspect is found to have substantial assets will it be possible at times to shift the focus back to the financial side of the question. no illegally obtained profits in some cases the suspects will not have received any illegally obtained profits or hardly any generally because the victims have not worked in prostitution or only briefly. for this reason the decision is sometimes taken to forego any further financial investigation. financial investigations start too late it is important that from the start of an investigation officers are alert to the financial aspect for financial investigation is a process in which any financial information that is found can be used to determine new avenues for further investigation. a late decision to start financial in in of the investigations studied the respondents indicated that having to intervene rapidly because of the ban on tolerating cases of thb was detrimental to the financial investigation. this was the case in of the investigations covered by this research according to information from the respondents. financial investigation vestigation can therefore have a detrimental impact on the final result. it does happen that an investigation initially focuses on an offence other than thb for example domestic vio lence in which financial investigation appears to be irrelevant. as soon as it appears to be a thb case the financial investigation gets underway but this can already be too late. lack of available financial expertise financial investigation can be undertaken by financial investigators deployed by the tactical team. financial investigation are also undertaken by tactical investigators with financial in vestigators in a advisory role in the background and if necessary to take over specific du ties . this means that the experts are further removed from the investigative work. the way in which financial expertise is deployed varies from one police force to another and one in vestigation to another. both a lack of financial expertise among tactical investigators and an absence of available fi nancial investigators can lead to no or poor financial investigations. as stated previously the aim behind the financial investigation project project financieel rechercheren was to give tactical investigators enough background knowledge to undertake financial investigation as well. in the current research however it was heard regularly that the training course devel oped for this was inadequate or the knowledge acquired had been forgotten. many tactical investigators regard financial investigation as a specialism and a job for financial investiga tors. gaining some experience with financial investigation preferably with positive results can operate as a stimulus. time consuming collaboration collaboration with financial bodies is cited in various publications as a bottleneck for ex ample in svb forensic business experts investigators . in the bnrm study it was also indicated that it is time consuming to take on board information from financial bod ies. priority motivation various publications including faber van nunen svb forensic business experts investigators mention the lack of priority and motivation for financial investigation with the police and the pps as a bottleneck. however financial investigations were a stan dard element in many of the thb cases investigated for the current research and there is a strong motivation to confiscate illegally obtained profits. in some regional police forces it has even been agreed that financial investigation is to be a standard element in every thb case whether or not it involves bringing in a financial investigator for the job. interest in fi nancial investigation appears to be on the increase given the fact that many respondents mentioned that it has now or recently become much better organised in their police force. yet further improvements in this area are possible. for instance it is still often too easily in the bnrm research financial investigators were brought into the team in cases and the financial investigation was largely undertaken by the tactical investigators in cases. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur concluded that there is no sense in conducting any further financial investigation meaning that it is not an obvious type of investigation in every case. . results of bnrm police study illegally obtained profits . . extent of illegally obtained profits the police calculated the illegally obtained profits for suspects in this research amounting to a total of or an average of per suspect. the highest amount a suspect earned from thb according to the calculations was and the lowest amount was . table . comprises an overview of the illegally obtained profits as calculated for suspects in thb cases for each year. table . illegally obtained profits per year illegally obtained total profits n n n n n tot . . tot . . tot . . or more total the amount of illegally obtained profits derived from thb varies with some earning a lot and others less. profits from thb human trafficking can have substantial returns. how much depends partly on the popularity of the victim prostitutes with clients. also income from prostitution fluctuates. evenings with football on the tv are notorious. a prostitute making good earnings will make between and per night according to mens undated . majoor suggests that earnings can run to per month. bel ser estimates that a victim exploited in an industrialised nation earns per month. it should be pointed out here that human traffickers can increase their earnings by selecting their victims and for example forcing them to work without condoms to work many and long working days and never to refuse clients. . . prejudgment seizure the pps can arrange for prejudgment seizure or attachment of a suspect s property even be fore there is a conviction article a code of criminal procedure . this way the pps wants to prevent suspects from removing their assets out of the state s reach. if the court imposes this is about . financial investigation a confiscation order or the conviction results in a monetary fine then these can be settled partly or fully from the attachment. prejudgment seizures were imposed in twelve of the investigations according to the current available information. for nine of these it was possible to establish what was seized. in eight instances the attachment affected one or more cars. the estimated execution sale value of the cars ranged from to . money in cash was attached in five investigations. the total executorial value for those investigations in which the value of the attachment could be established was or an average of for each investigation. . . siphoning and money laundering what do criminals do with the illegally obtained profits not spent straight away on luxury goods vehicles a luxury lifestyle an addiction or something else meloen et al. inves tigated this and discovered that criminals have a preference for holding foreign assets rather than dutch ones. in the current research bnrm also came across signs of cash flows to re positories abroad. another possibility is for criminal funds to be laundered or provided with an ostensibly le gal origin. the current research only disclosed one case involving money laundering so far as the in formation goes. a suspect bought a car paying in cash and arranged a loan on the same day to give the transaction with an appearance of legality. . results of bnrm police study confiscation the current research explored the extent to which claims for confiscation were lodged in thb cases and what results these had. . . confiscation in thb cases completed in it was indicated at the time for nine of the successfully completed cases in that con fiscation proceedings were to be initiated.nrm the current research shows that a confisca tion claim was actually lodged in four thb cases. these cases are described here. case loverboy the suspect of surinamese origins convinced his victims that he loved them. initially he made a big thing of giving presents but he turned out to be a pimp who did not shy away from violence and who the pps can only impose a prejudgment seizure if there is a suspicion of an offence for which a fifth category fine can be imposed. this is the case for thb. in a fifth case the confiscation claim was not based on illegally obtained profits from thb but on the profit derived from trading in narcotics the convicted individuals were guilty of both offences in this case . confiscation claims were renounced in the other cases. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur took all the money earned by the victims. he also turned his victims into drug addicts dependant on him for their supplies. three victims one of whom was a minor filed official reports against him. the victims worked in window brothels the minor using fake documents . it is not known whether the vic tims lodged compensation claims. the illegally obtained profits were calculated at . in the first instance the deprivation order was and an appeal was lodged at which stage the illegally obtained profits were established at and taking into account the suspect s ability to pay the amount payable to the state was fixed at . the accused lodged a cassation appeal in june . that proceeding had not been completed at the time of writing this report. case romanian victims four illegal romanian women one of whom was a minor were discovered during a regular police check at a legal brothel. they indicated they were victims of thb and filed official reports. the sus pects were the couple running the brothel. the brothel was in the wife s name because her husband had a criminal record involving thb and would therefore not be able to get a permit. the victims pointed to him as the principal perpetrator. the couple had not personally recruited the victims who did not claim compensation. the illegally obtained profits were calculated at between the two suspects. the confiscation case had still to be dealt with at the time of writing this report. case bulgarian victim a bulgarian man and his girlfriend recruited a victim in bulgaria and brought her to the netherlands where they forced her into prostitution by the use of violence. they collected all of the money the vic tim earned. she was put to work as an escort. administrative procedures were initiated against the op erator of the licensed escort bureau. it is not known whether the victim lodged a compensation claim. the illegally obtained profits were calculated at . in the first instance was allocated and no appeal was lodged. case the loverboy case m was years old when the regional police started investigating him for suspicion of involvement in thb as a loverboy . at the same time a financial investigation was initiated by the financial investiga tion bureau bureau financi le recherche bfr . the aim of this investigation was to establish the ille gally obtained profits with a view to confiscating them. the investigation focussed on charting out m s earnings and locating his assets. location of assets information from a range of sources including municipal authorities banks the national crime in vestigation agency and the social services was collated via a criminal financial investigation. the sus pect s telephone calls were also tapped he was put under surveillance and a request for legal assistance was sent to surinam. the suspect himself who had by now been arrested said nothing about his in come and did not even want to listen to the questions. his ex girlfriend however indicated that he had income from the work the girls do for him . by girls she meant the women he had forced into prosti tution. these victims seven in all made formal statements confirming this. assets were found follow ing searches at various houses. these included three rings estimated at new value and a financial investigation claim against an insurance company in connection with a car crash . a pre trial attachment was imposed on these. it later turned out that the insurance company never planned to make a pay ment because of payment arrears and information withheld by the suspect. request for legal assistance from surinam a suspicion arose based partly on a tapped telephone conversation between the suspect and his mother that m was keeping the money he had earned in surinam. the reason was that m had said during a call to his mother that he was arranging for grandpa to go to surinam in order to deposit it in a bank account. the surinamese authorities were therefore asked for legal assistance in the form of interviewing m s grandparents and searching their house in paramaribo. they were also asked to in vestigate any of m s assets or possessions. there were no concrete clues such as a bank account num ber. the investigation by the surinamese authorities did not lead to any of m s assets. the suspect s mother was interviewed by telephone. she stated that this was just m s big talk and that not to be taken seriously at all. calculation of illegally obtained profits victim p stated that in the period from october to november except for or days she worked for m every day as a prostitute a total of days . because p made contradictory statements about the amount of money she had earned the calculation of the amount m received from p was largely based on an analysis of telephone calls. p for example had conversations with m and victim w about what she had earned each day. m personally told a friend on the phone that he was earning be tween and each day. a total of calls contained information about p s earnings. based on these it was estimated that she earned an average of per day during the first period she worked for m and thereafter per day. multiplied by the number of working days in the first period and in the second the total amount m obtained from p was estimated at . victim a estimated her own earnings days each week at per day and days per week at per day. this victim worked for m as a prostitute for weeks and therefore earned for him. the income from the seven victims jointly added up to . to calculate the illegally obtained profits the costs had to be deducted from the income. the costs in cluded petrol and depreciation estimated at per day costs of a rental car per day tele phone costs estimated by those reporting the crime at per day costs of food and drink estimated by them at per day costs for hash estimated by them at per day costs for equipment such as condoms and lubricants estimated at per day costs of working clothes estimated on the basis of the reports at . per day costs for going out estimated on the basis of the reports at per day and overnight costs in hotels etc estimated on the basis of the reports at per day . the costs were always calculated at the daily maximum for the suspect s benefit. it was calculated that the daily total costs for one girl were . . the illegally obtained profits obtained for example from victim p then worked out at . . as regards three of the victims including victim a there were no ille gally obtained profits after deduction of the costs. in other words m had more costs for these girls than he received by way of income. the illegally obtained profits worked out on a transactional basis for all seven victims together amounted initially to . there was a subsequent correction . at that point he had two girls working for him. the calculation distinguished between two periods with different earnings because the victim s official statement was quite clear on this. m took the girls to where they worked by car. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur disposal by the court the confiscation case came up in december . m had already been sentenced to months impris onment at that stage but he had lodged an appeal. the court of appeal sentenced m to months in prison. at the lawyer s request the confiscation case was stayed and continued a few months later in may. this was because the lawyer wanted to interview two of the informants. the lawyer also objected to the way in which the illegally obtained profits had been calculated. all of the money had allegedly disappeared in costs incurred for the girls. certain costs had allegedly not been included in the calcula tion. in response a supplementary official statement was prepared by the financial investigator. after a closer scrutiny of the documents he actually reached a higher figure for the illegally obtained profits namely . instead of . . this was primarily the result of a recalculation of the ille gally obtained profits in relation to one of the victims not included as an example in the previous para graphs . costs had been incurred for a holiday that m had taken with the victim to surinam. assuming that he used this holiday to continue exercising his influence over her or to keep her attached to him it was established that these costs had to be deducted from the illegally obtained profits that had been calculated. nonetheless m s illegally obtained profits from this victim were much higher than had been calculated initially. this amount was allocated at first instance and on appeal. m therefore had to pay the state . . the victims made no claims for the money they had earned. it is not known whether they were informed about the possibility to lodge claims for compensation. the court did not avail itself of the opportunity to impose a compensation sanction order for restitution . . . confiscation in thb cases completed in there are signs of the intimation of a confiscation sanction in of the investiga tions into thb successfully completed in . the results for however show that this does not always actually lead to a confiscation case. one possible explanation is that public prosecutors have to indicate before their closing speeches whether or not a claim for confiscation is being lodged. at that point there is no need for a criminal profits report to have been prepared or the illegally obtained profits to have been calculated and the public prosecutor still has two years to decide on whether or not to lodge a confiscation claim. in eight of the cases mentioned above we do not yet know whether this will be happen ing. a verdict has been pronounced in seven of the cases. in five of these the claim was largely awarded while the outcome is not yet known in the other two. victims have either lodged a compensation claim or been awarded compensation in four of these seven cases. one suspect had been the subject of a confiscation order for thb once before. he never paid up on the claim however. in the new case against the suspect the illegally obtained profits were calculated but no confiscation case was initiated because he had no assets just debts . . results of bnrm police study compensation to victims this study included an enquiry as to whether the victims who had come in contact with the police during the thb investigations successfully completed in made any attempt to recover part of the money they had earned and turned over or compensation for any in financial investigation tangible losses for example through civil proceedings or joining a claim for civil damages in the criminal proceedings. so far as we are aware this happened in cases . this is more often than in previous years. many of the persons interviewed indicated that it grieved them that victims hardly ever get any of their money back from human traffickers. legislation appears to offer sufficient op portunities here but they are little used by victims. the possible reasons include a lack of information on the possibilities for obtaining compensation a lack of legal support for and assistance to victims fear of the adverse consequences of a claim for compensation. victims occasionally say as much to the police. a compensation claim can result in revenge or in the money being claimed back by the perpetrators once they are out of prison some victims told the police that they were happy to be rid of the suspect and wanted no more to do with him even in the context of a compensation claim victims for example of loverboys can still be so infatuated with the suspect that they do not want to lodge a compensation claim to avoid losing his love or because they feel that they are not victims and have handed over the money willingly. victims who have given money to the suspect but were also allowed to keep some themselves do not always re gard themselves as victims. lodging a claim for compensation then requires a reversal of their thinking some victims may know that there is nothing to recover from the suspect or assume this is the case . some victims cannot cooperate effectively with compensation claims lodged on their behalf for example because of drug addiction problems. . points of attention and bottlenecks there is no general consensus as to what financial investigation entails. this complicates discussion of the topic. with thb cases the illegally obtained profits are often calculated on a transactional basis possibly also in cases where a cash position asset comparison would be more beneficial. the amounts awarded by courts in confiscation cases are often much lower than the amounts claimed. the amount ultimately confiscated is often lower still. in addition to confiscation there are other facilities under criminal law for striking at a criminal s assets. an assessment by the tax administration can also be considered. indications of cash flows to repositories abroad or possessions held abroad do not always result in an effort to follow the cash flows or confiscate any assets held abroad. there is in sufficient international cooperation in confiscation cases. the number of investigations where one or more of the victims lodged a claim for compensation each year and . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur in many thb investigations the illegally obtained profits can be calculated on the basis of statements made by the victims. on the one hand it is being tried in thb investigations to avoid too early confrontations with victims so that the investigation is not hampered by the ban on allowing the crime to continue. on the other hand early intervention because of this ban can result in stagna tion of the financial investigation. obtaining information from financial institutions is time consuming. the police indicate that in certain cases the pps does not invest time in lengthy financial investigation and pays insufficient heed to the victims financial interests. financial investigation is often bypassed if there are no obvious prospects of confiscation. but financial investigation can be worthwhile even in these cases for example for gather ing evidence. also the fact that the suspect has no obvious assets does not mean that he has none at all. assets may have been sent abroad. there is sometimes a lack of time capacity or expertise for a financial investigation. also a late decision to undertake a financial investigation can have a detrimental impact on the fi nal result. victims appear to make little use of the possibilities offered by dutch law in relation to compensation the public prosecution service and prosecution . introduction this chapter contains an overview of relevant policy developments with regard to the pub lic prosecution service pps and the battle against trafficking in human beings thb as well as the results of secondary analyses of thb cases within pps data for the period be tween and . . policy developments the arrival of a new procurator general pg holding the portfolio for organised crime has given new lan to the fight against thb within the pps. the following section centres on the policy oriented and organisational embedding of the approach to thb within the pps and describes some practical points of departures. . . policy oriented and organisational embedding of the approach in november the minister of justice and the minister of the interior and kingdom relations established six spearheads for the fight against organised crime over the next few years. human trafficking is one of these spearheads. the board of procurators general en dorsed the same spearheads. this choice was reaffirmed in the pps policy plan prospects for perspectief op in the context of the programmatic approach to organ ised crime. the key to this approach is collaboration so that crime will not only be fought through the criminal law. programmatic approach to thb the programmatic approach was implemented for the first time in relation to thb. by combining administrative prevention with criminal law repression the pps intends to remove any scope for thb. whereas the developments in the pps s battle against thb as outlined in the third report were pre viously aimed at increasing the focus on immigration offences the emphasis in the next few years will be on the joint responsibility of administrative bodies and criminal law enforcement agencies. one of the agencies cooperating with the pps in the battle against thb is the immigration and naturalisation service immigratie en naturalisatiedienst ind . the ind implements parliamentary papers ii no. . the programmatic approach is also based on the siod barrier model. see also chapter . this became the case sneep which is discussed at greater length in chapter . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the b regulation in terms of which victims of thb and witnesses who have reported this crime can remain available to cooperate in investigation and prosecution. a number of communication bottlenecks between the pps and the ind as regards the application of the b scheme were mentioned in the third report. recent consultations between the pps and ind show that there are still bottlenecks decisions not to prosecute are not reported to the ind the pps only provides the ind with the names of suspects and the pps case number whereas the ind works with the names of victims. the pps and the ind are consulting about how to solve these problems. prospects for proclaims that there will be an extra effort to tackle the facilitators of thb and that international cooperation will be strengthened. another proposal from the plan relates to further specialisation in how to deal with major confiscation cases. the board of procurators general intends to reintroduce the subject of organised crime into the planning and control cycles for the local prosecutors offices. this means that per formance indicators will also be designated for also be applied the field of thb meaning in turn that thb will be a compulsory topic on the agendas of all local prosecutors offices and the board will be able to follow developments in the fight against thb more closely. participation in the periodic consultation among the public prosecutors one from each dis trict holding the thb portfolio is made compulsory in terms of the improvement pro gramme entitled the public prosecution service is changing het om verandert . higher qualifications will also be imposed on these thb prosecutors and their support staff a thb prosecutor will have to have had a number of years of experience and in service training and gaining in depth knowledge will be made more mandatory in nature for both the prose cutor and the supporting officer. there will also be improved guarantees for continuity of thb prosecutors and support staff who have gained experience in the area of thb. the national public prosecutor landelijk officier van justitie lovj for people smuggling and thb coordinates the combating of international organised thb from the national office of the pps landelijk parket lp . the lovj directs the national crime squad for this purpose and maintains close contact with its expertise centre on thb and people smuggling expertisecentrum mensenhandel en mensensmokkel emm see chapter . . . practical points of departure improvements to information gathering the pps focuses on improving the information gathering in order to put the fight against thb on a higher plane though the programmatic approach. the aim is not so much to gen erate a larger number of thb investigations or prosecutions but rather a more targeted ap announced in a letter of november from the pg organised crime to the principal public prosecutors. the public prosecution service and prosecution plication of available knowledge and capacity based on a better understanding of the prob lem. relevant information at the strategic level is assembled into crime scenarios and crime scenario analyses. it is also worth mentioning in this context that the pg organised crime has indicated that he regards administrative reports see also chapter as being important so that relevant information is available for every agency involved in the fight against thb. the instruction on trafficking in human beings one important pillar for the practice of investigating and prosecuting thb is the instruction on trafficking in human beings aanwijzing mensenhandel outlining the central points of the fight against thb. this instruction replaced the previous instruction on trafficking in human beings and other forms of exploitation in prostitution with effect from april . the main reason for formulating the new instruction was the entering into force the new thb provision in the dutch criminal code on january . the previous instruction only re ferred to sexual exploitation and was also out of date on several other points. the instruction outlines how the investigation and prosecution of thb should be ap proached frequently using mandatory terms. thus every serious indication of thb has to be reported to the public prosecutor and to the emm and such indications have to lead to investigation and if possible prosecution. there must be an active attempt at international collaboration in case of cross border thb. also investigations into thb should include fi nancial investigation and an investigation aimed at confiscation. the instruction clearly shows the intention of the pps to establish greater collaboration with other relevant agen cies and the importance attached to pre investigation and law enforcement in sectors and situations where there is a significant risk of thb. for this reason an appendix is attached to the instruction containing a list of indicators of thb that can be used in the field to identify possible trafficking situation. the instruction also gives guidance on how to deal with victims witnesses and their reports or statements. another appendix to the instruction contains a section on the proper treat ment of victims with a further explanation of the offence of thb both as regards its mani festations and its characteristic features. . research results this paragraph shows how many cases are registered with the pps how many are dealt with by the pps and how many are settled by the courts per year. so no cohort was followed. the research methodology can be found in appendix . as a result of the legislative amendment which took effect on january replacing article a dutch criminal albeit improved information will probably also result in more cases. this means that the figures do not always regard the exactly the same cases as not all cases are registered dealt with by the pps and settled by the courts in the same year. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur code by the wider ranging article a dutch criminal code it is impossible to report in a uniform manner on the period before and after the date of its entry into force. this makes it difficult to draw comparisons between the years before and after january . it is known however that all the cases in as in previous years relate to exploitation in the sex industry. . . cases of thb registered with the public prosecution service in the period from to criminal cases were registered with the pps involving among others or exclusively a suspicion of thb articles ter a and or a dutch criminal code . a criminal case in the context of prosecution is the case against a single accused. table . shows how many cases there were each year and so far as known how many cases also involved underage victims. table . number of cases registered and cases also involving underage victims per annum year cases registered cases partly relating to minor aged victims total the number of registered cases fluctuates the low number of cases registered in was followed by a peak year with cases registered in but then a relative low point with only cases in . the standard report on thb by the national public prosecutor s of fice parket generaal pag dated november shows that more thb cases were registered with the pps in the period from january up to and including august than for the whole of . nevertheless it is worthwhile exploring the possible explanations for the low number of registrations in and mainly whether there are factors at play of a more structural nature. the pps has convened a working group to look into possible rea sons consequences and solutions. renumbered as art. f dutch criminal code in mid . for the sake of clarity this chapter refers to arti cles ter a and a respectively meaning articles ter old a old and a old respectively. including cases subsequently dismissed by the pps or where the ultimate charges did not include thb. criterion used registration under article sub sections that indicate explicitly the minority age of the victims. underage victims may also however be involved in cases charged under different article sub sections so that the figures here are almost certainly underestimates. including cases transferred to a different court jurisdiction of them. the public prosecution service and prosecution possible causes of the low number of cases registered with the public prosecution service in the possible causes which partly only apply in certain districts include in no particular order the fact that authorities are still getting used to the new thb article a dutch criminal code a tempo rary lack of checks in the prostitution sector prostitution police teams focussing on administrative checks rather than criminal investigations a lack of police capacity and competition from other of fences a lack of priority authorities waiting for assistance from the emm or passing the buck to emm a primarily reactive approach acting only when the crime is reported failure to record indica tions reorganisations frequently changing duty priorities for public prosecutors the temporary lack of a thb public prosecutor and the prosecution of thb suspects for offences other than thb. the number of cases relating also to underage victims fell in in both absolute and relative terms but rose again in . for the entire period from to of the cases relates also to underage victims. this tells us nothing about the number of underage victims. table . reflects the results of differentiating the thb cases registered with the pps accord ing to the paragraphs within the thb provision s in the dutch criminal code. table . type of thb for each year of registration type of total thb n n n n n n ter a ter a a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a total the vast majority of thb cases in the period from to relates to articles ter or a i.e. thb by two or more persons acting in concert or involving a victim under the age of or resulting in serious physical injury. in after the new thb provision article a criminal code came into effect on january many of the cases nearly one third relate to article a i.e. thb by two or more persons acting in concert or involv ing a victim under the age of . there is also a fairly frequent occurrence of cases registered under articles ter a or in a in the period from to . in a few cases were registered under article a thb committed by two or more persons acting in concert and involving a victim under the age of . exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry and certain activities relating to organ removal were brought within the scope of thb when article a criminal code came into effect. unfortunately the way the article is worded does not allow for differentiation articles ter a and a and are not mentioned in the table because they were not in operation during the relevant period. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur by the nature of the exploitation according to paragraphs and sub paragraphs. it is known though that in the courts did not deal with any cases concerning exploitation outside the sex industry or organ removal. human trafficking is often committed in combination with other offences such as arrang ing entry into the country for undocumented migrants attempted rape or complicity in rape possession or use of weapons attempted deliberate deprivation of liberty or being an accessory to this or offences connected with drugs making and using fake or forged travel documents assault and threats.nrm hence a single case can cover several offences. table . provides an overview of the most severe offence registered for each thb case. cases combining different offences with the same maximum penalty are classified under thb. table . most serious offence per year of registration total most severe offence n n n n n n sexual violence other violence offence against property vandalism public order thb ter a thb ter a thb a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a thb a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a thb a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a n a other offences un der criminal code total in thb was the only or the most serious offence registered in of cases with the corresponding figure for being of the cases. in the other cases there was an even more serious crime involved besides thb usually a form of sexual violence such as indecent assault or rape. if this still produces a combination of offences with the same maximum penalty then the offence committed first takes precedence. for example thb in combination with fraud bribing an official bigamy inducing a minor to drunkenness or abducting a minor.nrm the public prosecution service and prosecution looking at the period from to as a whole thb was the only or the most serious offence registered in of the cases. there are fewer registrations of thb in combination with participation in a criminal or ganisation article dutch criminal code . possible explanations include that the thb cases mainly relate to suspects operating on their own such as loverboys and or that they are principally quick hit cases. . . the suspects age in more than three quarters of the cases registered in and in the suspect s age at the time of the first thb offence was between and . the average age in was and in it was and in both these years there were four underage suspects and respectively . country of origin the suspects came from more than different countries. table . shows in alphabetical order the most important countries of origin. see table b . in appendix for a com plete overview. table . country of birth of suspects per year of registration country of birth total n n n n n n albania bulgaria czech republic federal republic of germany hungary iraq morocco netherlands netherlands antilles nigeria poland romania former soviet union one individual can be suspected of several thb offences. standard deviation is in both years. see appendix for a more detailed explanation. there were in in and in . the criterion for inclusion in this table is that at least five suspects came from the country concerned in one of the years or at least ten over the entire period from to . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur suriname former yugoslavia turkey other unknown total the netherlands was again the most frequently occurring country of birth in and . looking at the entire period from to the substantial proportion of suspects born in turkey and bulgaria both around is worth mentioning. proportionately though the number of suspects from bulgaria diminished. countries such as albania and the former yugoslavia seemed to peak incidentally as countries of birth in and respectively . romania scored high in and . table . shows the annual ranking order for the five most prevalent countries of birth for suspects. table . ranking of the most prevalent countries of birth of suspects per year of registration land total rank rank rank rank rank rank albania bulgaria hungary morocco netherlands romania former soviet union suriname turkey former yugoslavia as in previous years the overview shows a constant first place for the netherlands as coun try of birth and also a reasonably stable position for turkey in the top five. in the previous report bulgaria and yugoslavia were also mentioned as more or less steady top countries but these have become less significant as countries of birth for suspects. by contrast mo rocco s share has increased substantially. ethnic background is not registered. the former yugoslavia also scored highly at the end of the s in and in . the year is taken as reference point for determining the order in which the countries are listed. an accent indicates a shared position. the public prosecution service and prosecution gender most suspects are male in of the cases in and of the cases in . there are however clear distinctions between countries of origin. if we confine ourselves to the most important countries of origin for suspects as included in table . it is noticeable that there are scarcely any women among the turkish or moroccan suspects no more than to whereas a substantial proportion of the russian the few hungarian the romanian and the bulgarian suspects were female and respectively . the other coun tries of origin occupy a position in between these extremes. for instance of dutch sus pects are female. . . cases dealt with by the public prosecution service table . shows for each year of registration the number of thb cases in which the suspect was taken into pre trial detention. table . pre trial detention per year of registration preventive total custody n n n n n n yes no total in and about three quarters of the suspects were in pre trial detention at the moment the case was brought before the court. this percentage rate is fairly stable over the years. table . shows how the pps processes cases. while the above tables refer to the crimi nal cases registered in the period from to . table . concerns the cases the pps dealt with in the same period. table . cases dealt with by the pps per year in which the cases were dealt with dealt with total n n n n n n thb summons unconditional deci sion not to prosecute this also applies to suspects from albania of the suspects from suriname are female. the difference between the number of cases registered and the number disposed of by the public prosecutions service results from the fact that the public prosecutions service does not always take a decision on prosecution in the same year when the case is registered. it concerns a summons for thb either solely or in addition to other offences. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur summons for others offences transfer joinder of cases conditional decision not to prosecute out of court settlement total the number of cases dealt with shows a similar pattern to the number of cases registered with the pps was a peak year with cases but was followed by a relative low point with only cases processed in . the summons was by far the most common disposal in both these years and of the cases respectively . the summons are usually also for thb more than of all out comes in both years but sometimes only for other offences. a quarter of the cases was un conditionally dismissed in and of the cases in . the other forms of dealing with thb cases joinder of cases transfers conditional dismissal and out of court settle ment were only used sporadically. unconditional dismissals happened more often for cases of non aggravated thb than for those cases where there was an element of aggravation. a relatively high proportion of the thb cases registered under the new article a ended with a summons frequently for thb . this was the case for of the cases registered under article a and virtually all of those registered under the more serious paragraphs and . . . settlement by the court to recapitulate in the period from to cases were registered with the pps in which there was also a suspicion of thb. during the same period cases were dealt with by the pps. also in the same period the courts of the first instance settled a total of cases in which thb was also charged. table . provides a summary for each year of settlement of the judgments by the courts. it concerns cases in which despite earlier suspicions of thb ultimately no charge of thb was made. to another district or abroad. the number of cases dealt with by the pps will be higher again for than for . up until august the figure stood at national public prosecutor s office standard report on thb of november . these are not the exact same cases as those registered with or dealt with by the pps in this period. the follow ing information does not include the cases registered with the pps as also involving thb but in which the summons was issues only for other offences. the public prosecution service and prosecution table . settlement in the first instance per year of settlement settlement total n n n n n n sentenced acquittal discharge from prosecution pps inadmissible summons invalid joinder of cases total a large majority of the cases brought to the courts in and ended with a guilty verdict. the accused was acquitted in and of the cases respectively. the other forms of settlement were used occasionally. table . provides an overview of the nature of the disposal at first instance according to the most serious offence charged. table . settlement for most serious crime per year of settlement most serious crime judgment total thb sentence ter a cc acquittal discharge from prosecution joinder of cases total thb sentence ter a cc acquittal pps n.a. joinder of cases total thb sentence n a n a n a n a a cc acquittal n a n a n a n a total n a n a n a n a thb sentence n a n a n a n a a cc acquittal n a n a n a n a total n a n a n a n a sexual violence sentence acquittal pps n.a. joinder of cases trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur most serious crime judgment total total other violence sentence acquittal total offences against sentence property total vandalism sentence public order total other offences under the criminal code sentence acquittal summons invalid total total sentence acquittal discharge from prosecution pps n.a summons invalid joinder of cases total pps inadmissible the detailed subdivision means that some cells are so empty that percentage rates are fairly meaningless. hence these are only included in the fuller cells. points worth noting in the rate for guilty verdicts in cases where thb was the most serious charge was close to and this also applies to all cases together see the bottom part of the table in the rate of guilty verdicts was a little lower for charges under article ter a paragraphs and together and for charges under the new article a. sentences imposed until recently pps data only contained information on the nature of judicial decisions in re lation to the summons and not in relation to the offences for which an accused is ultimately convicted. this has changed. from onwards it is possible to disregard the cases where thb was charged but did not lead to a conviction for thb. however in order to enable a comparison with previous years the present report includes an overview table . of the kinds of sentences imposed in all cases where the summons included thb charges by the most serious offence resulting in a conviction. so this includes the cases in which the court did not convict the accused for thb. the public prosecution service and prosecution table . sentence imposed for most serious crime per year of settlement most serious crime sentence imposed total thb no principal sentence ter a cc conditional principal sen tence custodial sentence cso fine custodial sentence cso total thb no principal sentence ter a cc conditional principal sen tence conditional sentence conditional sentence fine cso cso fine fine custodial sentence cso total thb conditional sentence ter cc total thb conditional sentence n a n a n a n a a cc total n a n a n a n a thb conditional sentence n a n a n a n a a cc total n a n a n a n a sexual violence conditional sentence custodial sentence cso total other violence no principal sentence conditional sentence cso fine total offences against conditional sentence property total it concerns unconditional sentences unless indicated otherwise. in cases in this category an additional sentence e.g. confiscation or a measure e.g. detention under a hospital order may have been imposed. the term additional sentence is somewhat misleading because the court may also impose only such a sentence. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur most serious crime sentence imposed total conditional principal sen tence vandalism public order conditional sentence cso fine conditional sentence cso total other offences under conditional sentence the criminal code total other and unknown no principal sentence conditional sentence fine conditional sentence fine total total no principal sentence conditional principal sen tence conditional sentence conditional sentence fine cso cso fine fine conditional sentence cso total community service order this table also includes only few percentage rates because of the large number of almost empty cells. the following points are worth noting in a sentence of imprisonment was passed in of all cases in which thb was charged whether or not in combination with other offences and where the court im posed a penalty. this was sometimes combined with a monetary fine or community ser vice. the figure for was . in the period from to this annual percentage rate was in the range between and . in in of all cases where ter a was the most serious offence and a penalty was imposed this was imprisonment. the figure for was . this percentage also has grown in recent years in it was . either imprisonment only or imprisonment plus a community service order or a monetary fine. the public prosecution service and prosecution conviction for thb a total of accuseds were found guilty of thb in the period from to . uncon ditional prison sentences were imposed in of these thb cases of which were combined with unconditional monetary fines or community service order. the average prison sentence was roughly months days standard deviation . the highest av erage prison sentence was imposed in cases where violence was the most serious offence days or more than five and a half years in cases of sexual violence standard deviation and days or more than six and a half years in cases of other violence standard deviation . . . appeal the pps data is limited to the settlement of cases by courts of the first instance. in addition to this it is known whether an appeal has been lodged in such a case and by whom. table . provides an overview. table . appeal lodged per year of settlement at the first instance appeal lodged total n n n n n n none by pps by the accused by both parties total the table shows that an appeal was lodged in of the cases in and of the cases in most often only or also by the accused. the percentage varies slightly over the years. . international developments . . international collaboration the national action plan against thb indicated that the cabinet would promote interna tional collaboration where possible. the pps was asked to indicate where it was encounter ing hindrances in practice. a working group from the thb prosecutors consultation group has concluded that international cooperation is not always easy albeit not impossible. it this means that in this period cases resulted in a conviction for one or more offences other than thb see the totals for to included in table . minus . cases in total. five cases in total. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur does require extra input and is therefore time consuming. the pressure from the imposi tion of performance standards is diametrically opposed to this and needs to be dealt with. a solution can usually be found for most practical hindrances. europol and eurojust can play their part by indicating any incompatibilities in definitions and legislation while dutch for eign liaison officers can be particularly useful in setting up contacts and acquiring informa tion. any unfamiliarity among public prosecutors with international collaboration can be obviated by training and education in this area. . . eurojust the number of cases being referred to eurojust from various countries has been climbing steadily for some years increasing by to in . the nature of eurojust s mandate implies that these cases involve at least two european countries. eurojust plays an active part in investigation and prosecution in these cases in collaboration with the relevant na tional agencies. cases involving thb and people smuggling were referred to eurojust in . nine of the total of coordination meetings organised by eurojust in related to thb. the aim of these meetings is to facilitate collaboration and coordinate action in specific cases. eurojust also organises strategic meetings on important investigations into and prosecutions of serious organised crime. one of the topics in was thb. the aim of these strategic meetings is threefold . to disseminate information on practical prosecution problems and on solutions and best practices in the area of thb and to set up a forum where legal officials can discuss the subject with their colleagues from other countries . to create networks of public prosecutors and detectives working in the field of thb and to generate confidence in order to secure improved faster and more direct collaboration and coordination within the european countries and . to identify possible new cases for col laboration and coordination and to draw them to the attention of eurojust. the eurojust annual report contains an extensive report on the most important findings from the strategic meeting on thb and people smuggling . . points of attention and bottlenecks points of attention and bottlenecks in relation to the prosecution of thb. increased attention to the fight against thb greater attention is being paid to the fight against thb at the policy level within the pub lic prosecution service. it is important that this should now be translated into the practice information based on data from the annual report eurojust . there were in . the annual report describes two thb cases. the text of the annual report only mentions thb cases the tables containing numerical information appear to show that these include both thb and people smuggling cases. no further subdivision is made. the public prosecution service and prosecution of investigation and prosecution. there are still variations in the degree of priority given to thb in the various districts. performance indicators may well assist in placing the fight against thb on the agenda but they can operate as a hindrance to important but time consuming activities such as for in stance international collaboration and confiscation. they can also result in too much in vestment being made in quick hit cases and not enough in investigation and prosecution of all suspects in a given case. the reduction in the number of combined registrations of thb and membership of a criminal organisation might be an indicator of this. despite consultation between the pps and the ind the bottlenecks in the collaboration between these two chain partners have not yet been resolved. the plans to improve the public prosecution service s information position via the pro grammatic approach are not designed to increase the numbers of investigations and prosecutions for thb but may well lead to this and then extra capacity would be needed to cope. prosecution and trial in the number of cases of thb registered with and processed by the pps and dis posed of by the courts was low. provisional figures for indicate that this was not the start of a downward trend the numbers of thb cases were on the increase again in . it is unfortunate that the shared perspective of the public prosecutors holding the thb portfolio one from each district are not always being applied by the case prosecutors in practice. the sentences imposed for thb are low. the question arises as to whether the courts are always sufficiently conscious of the nature and gravity of the offence of thb. human trafficking is not a specialist area for the judiciary. points of attention in relation to academic research the wording of the thb article is such that it is impossible to discern the type of exploita tion involved in the sex industry in other sectors of the economy or in relation to organ removal from registration under different paragraphs and sub paragraphs. this is a prob lem from the perspective of research. from the researcher s point of view it is inconvenient that the information from eurojust does not differentiate between thb and people smuggling. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry . introduction according to the palermo protocol and the eu framework decision exploitation which is a characteristic of thb can take the form of forced labour or services slavery or practices similar to slavery. these elements have been incorporated into article f dutch criminal code. the description of the offence of thb now covers exploitation in every economic sector as well as the coerced removal of organs. when the new clause on thb was introduced neither researchers nor the investigative ser vices had a good notion of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry in the nether lands. the exploratory literature search by van der leun and vervoorn had indicated that an increased risk was present with respect to these forms of exploitation. bnrm ac cordingly carried out an exploratory study aimed at collecting case studies of serious abuses in employment situations. exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry does occur in the netherlands but it is impossible to determine the scale of the problem. this chapter presents the results of the bnrm study into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. it deals with the term exploitation the collected cases and their categori sation the relevant economic sectors the groups at risk and finally with points of attention and bottlenecks in the fight against this type of exploitation. . bnrm study into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry the preliminary bnrm study into exploitation outside the sex industry covered the period from to and was not confined to specific economic sectors regions or groups in society. the methodology applied was qualitative making use of case descriptions in par ticular. this methodological approach stemmed in part from the absence of empirical re search into this type of exploitation in the netherlands or operational information from po lice investigations. appendix contains an explanation of the research methods used. . . definition of terms many people think of exploitation as a situation where someone makes someone else work in unfavourable conditions in order to earn as much money as possible. the definition of the description of the offence does not require that someone should actually have been exploited. the research did not encompass every element of the definition of thb as an offence. this is explained in . . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur exploitation as stipulated in the criminal code does not however coincide with the mean ing of the term in common parlance. the legal expression only covers extremely unfavour able conditions. article f dutch criminal code deals with excesses where human rights are at stake. this is apparent from the explanatory memorandum which indicates that ex ploitation as defined in the clause on thb relates to modern forms of slavery. the minister of justice when submitting to the lower house the additional measures for the national human trafficking action plan aanvullende maatregelen bij het nationaal actieplan mensen handel emphasised that thb relates to excessively degrading circumstances in employ ment or service relationships involving fundamental breaches of human rights. this may include forcing someone to work or abusing someone s dependent position if in the given circumstances that person reasonably has no other choice than to end up being exploited. the explanatory memorandum cites the example of an extremely long working week for disproportionately low wages in poor working conditions. the fact that the article on thb is not intended to criminalise less serious abuses can also be inferred from the fact that it is included in the title crimes against personal freedom in the dutch criminal code. . . the reasons for the bnrm study information from surrounding countries it is a known fact that in other western european countries serious abuses in employment situations take place. in belgium for example for some years a quarter of the registered vic tims of thb have been exploited in other sectors than the sex industry centre for equal opportunities and opposition to racism and a french parliamentary investigating commission found exploitation in textile sweatshops the catering industry and elsewhere lazerges . exploitation outside the sex industry also occurs in the united kingdom and germany e.g. anderson cyrus . it is likely therefore that this type of exploitation is also going on in the netherlands. at the same time relevant distinc tions that may be able to be drawn between the netherlands and the surrounding countries. the fact that the netherlands has a relatively small informal economy and domestic sector for instance could reduce the risk of labour exploitation. but the precise influence of these factors is unknown. conclusions from an earlier literature study the exploratory literature study on slavery like exploitation in the netherlands by van der leun and vervoorn appeared shortly before the former article a dutch criminal code came into effect. the authors conclude that there appears to be large scale and in creasing illegal employment in the netherlands and that illegal workers find it very difficult to insist on proper working conditions. it also appears that their working conditions and po parliamentary papers ii no. . parliamentary papers ii no. p. . with effect from september the thb provision was renumbered as art. f dutch criminal code. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry sition in the employment market have deteriorated in recent years and that the increasingly underground nature of illegal employment is leading to situations that might readily turn into slavery like practices van der leun vervoorn . the authors also point out the increased risk of excesses resulting from the growing numbers of fraudulent labour subcon tractors and undocumented migrants working in private households. discussion of the new article on thb with the introduction of the new article on thb it has not become entirely clear when a situation of reprehensible working conditions is deemed to cross the line into exploitation as defined in article f paragraph dutch criminal code. the legislature has left it partly up to the courts to define the exact scope of the new provision. until more case law than the current very few judgments is available this will hamper investigation and prosecution of exploitation outside the sex industry. the input of case descriptions should facilitate the discussion on the scope of the article while knowledge of the various forms in which ex ploitation manifests itself is important for the fight against thb. . . response table . shows the categories of organisations and individuals who received a questionnaire about possible exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry as well as the response rates. key figures were approached directly. this allowed bnrm to record case stud ies. the number of individuals concerned is higher as some of the cases involve several people working in very poor circumstances and or several profiteers. not all of the cases collected are cases of exploitation as defined in article f dutch criminal code however. the respondents also described situations which were not so serious as to amount to exploitation in the sense of thb. categorisation on the basis of article f dutch criminal code follows at . . . table . response rate per category to bnrm questionnaires category approached replies response rate interviews cases social workers social aid organisations lawyers social council members reception centres for asylum seekers and illegals labour market fraud teams n a. medical staff at the johannes the netherlands is not an exception here. as far as forced labour is concerned the ilo has established that nearly all countries have made this a criminal offence but that there are almost no detailed definitions of the expression. the result is that there are seldom any prosecutions so that there is little political interest in the subject ilo . two cases became known to bnrm from various sources. these are counted once. the amf described employment situations too briefly to be able to talk about specific individual cases. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur category approached replies response rate interviews cases wierstichting migrant organisations investigators at the social information and investigation service siod total table . key figures contacted directly category respondents interviews cases social workers investigators trade unions industry sector organisations government agencies other total . exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry in the sense of thb . . legal perspective during the first year after it entered into force the new article on thb raised many ques tions among the special investigation services the public prosecution service lawyers and ngos. in particular the concept exploitation requires more clarification. the legislature has intended that article f dutch criminal code should deal with situations involving excesses but the wording provides a potentially wider scope. a literal interpretation would allow article f dutch criminal code to cover situations with varying degrees of gravity. however not every abuse in an employment or service relationship should be regarded as thb. exploitation outside the sex industry involves an excess though there is no unambi guous description of this available. the issue must be determined on a case by case basis with one of the determining factors being violation of fundamental human rights. it had not been intended to interview siod investigators but one investigator contacted bnrm in person. the siod investigators described employment situations too briefly to be able to talk about specific individual cases. we also talked to key figures dealing with exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry in certain foreign countries. they are not included in this table. only interviews concerning substantive information immediately irrelevant to the research for example cases or risk sectors are included. some of these issues were raised during the congress jointly organised by bnrm entitled forms of thb outside the sex industry in march . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry the link with human rights from the point of view of legislative history it makes sense to link the interpretation of article f dutch criminal code to the protection of human rights. the list of practices that exploitation at least comprises in paragraph is based on article a of the palermo protocol and article . .c of the eu framework decision. those provisions in turn derive definitions from article of the european convention on the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms echr . an interpreta tion based on these sources implies that a human rights approach should define the limits of the scope of article f dutch criminal code. labour situations then only amount to exploitation in the sense of thb if they involve a violation of fundamental rights such as human dignity physical integrity and personal freedom. a situation can be deemed to be excessive if there is one manifest excess such as having to rent a chair in the workplace as sleeping accommodation between shifts or if there is an ac cumulation of less serious matters such as underpayment. in such cases the excess is to be found in the buildup of abuses. the excess must in principle be measured according to the standards applicable in dutch society and the dutch legal system. the use of certain means of force is not a necessary element of exploitation. at the same time it is hard to imagine someone volunteering to be exploited. the involuntary nature of the situation consists of the impossibility of getting out of it. sometimes exploitation is the result of a physical restriction on freedom such as confinement. but the exploiter can also keep the victim in his grasp in some other way and then the victim s perception of the situa tion may hinder escape although possible in practical terms. the question is then whether s he can reasonably have been under the impression that there is no way to escape from the situation given the complete set of circumstances as well as how these circumstances inter relate. . . indicators of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry how to recognise an exploitative situation in this study bnrm used the following list of indicators which can help to identify a situation of exploitation. list of important indicators of a possibly exploitative situation coercion deception threats of physical violence against the employee threats of reporting the employee s illegal residence status putting unacceptable pressure on the employee in some other way putting the employee to work in a different sector or under different conditions to those agreed abusing the employee s ignorance of his rights bad working conditions whether the victim feels exploited is not a determining factor. consent is irrelevant if certain elements of coercion have been used. people may be recruited and subsequently coerced to continue working in deplorable circumstances cgkr . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur compulsory dangerous work unreasonable working hours being paid less than the minimum wage or nothing at all having to work even when ill lack of freedom the employer intermediary confiscates the employee s travel documents the employee is not allowed any or hardly any contact with the outside world multiple dependence the employee is bound to the employer intermediary by debt the employee is dependent on the employer for for example accommodation food or documents it is possible to think of other indicators. not all of the indicators need to be present for a suspicion of exploitation but it is important to be aware of the possible connection between different reprehensible circumstances. one should not only take note of a worker s resi dence status for example without relating it to sub standard working hours remuneration and accommodation. barrier model the barrier model developed by the social information and investigation service sociale inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst siod is useful to see the interconnection between indi cators of labour exploitation. this model provides a schematic representation of four barri ers to be overcome by immigrants travel accommodation identity documents and finding employment. there is a legal path and an illegal path associated with each of the barriers. if for any one of the barriers migrants have to rely on the services of illegal facilitators such as smugglers rack renters document forgers or malafide job contractors they often build up a debt. multiple dependence can arise if someone becomes dependent on the same indi vidual in connection with two or more of the barriers. this increases the risk of exploitation. malafide facilitators sometimes employ violence against migrants. neither the barriers in this model nor the indicators of thb listed should be understood as falling within any fixed chronology. the model is an analytical tool which facilitates the observation and recording of multiple dependence. combination of sexual exploitation and other forms of exploitation exploitation in another sector than the sex industry may precede coincide with or follow on sexual exploitation. bnrm collected eight case descriptions with indications of this combi nation. this description of the barrier model is drawn from van der lugt and zoetekouw . for each barrier the model specifies illegal facilitators legal facilitators and the relevant enforcement bodies. research commissioned by the dutch government de huisvestingsproblematiek bij tijdelijke werknemers uit het buitenland showed temporary migrant workers living or working in more than half of the municipalities investigated. two thirds of these municipalities experience problems related to the accommodation of the migrant workers such as a shortage of suitable housing or the availability of inferior housing only. the government then developed a leaflet about providing proper accommodations for temporary migrant workers. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry . . labour and services human trafficking revolves around exploitation in labour or services but a broad interpre tation of the terms labour and services is needed in this context. the description of the of fence does not confine itself to formal employment relationships. labour and services also include other work that represents a financial value done in a context where one individual exercises control over another. some relevant aspects of labour law labour law has elements of both public and private law. regarding labour conditions it principally consists of rules on maximum working hours and on health and safety. administrative and criminal sanctions are available for infringement of some of these rules while the enforcement of others is delegated to employees the parties to collective labour agreements and works councils. legislation on employment contracts contains rules on the contract between an individual employee and his or her employer including rules on the payment of wages. this area of labour law is governed by article dutch civil code and by collective labour agreements. enforcement occurs through proceed ings before the civil courts. the aliens employment act wet arbeid vreemdelingen wav prohibits employers to hire certain foreign nationals without a permit to do so. this applies to work through an employment contract or by virtue of any other structure undertaken commercially or in the private sphere. if someone is found to employ a migrant illegally it is assumed that this migrant has worked with that employer for six months for normal wages and working hours in the relevant sector. this is also the assumption in case the employee submits a claim for back wages. illegal employment does not absolve employers from their obligations in relation to the employees concerned. however it appears that immigrants who have been working illegally and underpaid rarely claim back wages. one lawyer in the bnrm research described as unique the wage claims she had lodged for three chinese clients held in aliens detention each for more than and based on the collective agreement in the catering industry and the number of hours worked. possible explana tions why the underpayment of illegal workers does not lead to wages claims more often include igno rance among these workers about their rights and how to enforce them fear of the employer multiple dependence on the employer untraceability of the employer inability to demonstrate that they have worked for the particular employer a desire to stay below the radar of official bodies and the fear that proceedings before the civil courts might have consequences for their residence in the netherlands. normal employment situation still exploitation several cases have been noted in which someone forces someone else to work some place under normal conditions and then to hand over his or her wage entirely. in this situation there is no employment relationship between the exploiter and the victim. this often goes hand in hand with the money being squandered by the person who has extorted it. do these cases without actual abuses at the workplace constitute exploitation in the sense of article the following section is based on bakels et al. . reference is made to chapter for the bill amending the minimum wage and minimum holiday allowance act in connection with the introduction of administrative enforcement wet op het minimumloon . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur f dutch criminal code exploitation is not confined to serious abuses in an employment situation. it can also take the form of coercion to work. it is not necessary for the exploiter to be exercising control over the victim at the workplace or as an employer. criminal conduct bnrm has collected a number of cases concerning coerced criminal acts such as pickpock eting and forgery which can be regarded as a form of labour or services. the same applies to the coerced conclusion of loans for someone else. forcing someone else to commit a crime may in certain circumstances amount to thb but it can also be dealt with under criminal law as incitement. incitement approximating exploitation in october the court of appeal in arnhem convicted an accused for inciting minors to commit theft. according to the court he had played a prominent and leading part in a criminal organisation formed of members of his immediate family and extended roma family. within this organisation the suspect and his wife on many occasions sent out young children on burglary jobs including their own children. a telephone conversation between the accused s wife and their son illustrates this he was reprimanded by his mother because of the fact that he was not a good burglar. the verdict contains lit tle information on how the accused sent the children out to burgle. it is stated though that they were often young children some of whom were under the parental authority of the people inciting them which suggests that they had no reasonable alternative but to commit the break ins. an argument could therefore be made that such practices constitute forced or compulsory labour or services. other conduct in relation to thb a possible area for debate is whether having to tolerate something can amount to exploita tion in the sense of thb. the question is a relevant one as appears from media reports in and the ensuing political debate on the smuggling of somali children for temporary residence in the netherlands with a view to enrichment through child benefit. can the fol lowing situation be classified as exploitation adults bring a child to the netherlands illegally and under false pretences in order to receive child benefit payments and spend less than that amount on actual care of the child after which when this is no longer possible the child is taken back to somalia and abandoned there or does this only amount to thb if it also in volves abuses in relation to work in the additional measures to the national action plan on thb aanvullende maatregelen bij het nam the minister of justice states that these kinds of practice generally fall beyond the reach of the section on thb but may be criminal of fences under other provisions. hence certain conduct may almost amount to or form an element of exploitation while at the same time constituting a different offence such as illegal adoption rack renting and forced marriages. illegal adoption only falls within the definition of thb if there is an inten tion to exploit the adopted child according to the minister of justice in the additional measures. rack renting is a form of residential letting where the landlord knowingly and willingly accepts a dangerous condition or use of the accommodation for the highest possi exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry ble return. if this involves the rental of accommodation to undocumented migrants it amounts to smuggling article a paragraph dutch criminal code . rack renting therefore is not exploitation in the sense of thb per se but may well be an indication be cause it can be coupled with a forced labour situation. schmidt and rijken argue that arranging a forced marriage falls in principle within the thb provision if the person ar ranging the marriage receives money or other assets in return. . case descriptions a total of case descriptions of abuse in labour situations were collected. they vary widely in terms of gravity. all cases were considered on the basis of the criterion discussed in the following section in order to determine which should be categorised as exploitation. the aim was to formulate a criterion that could be used in legal practice. . . contains the categorisation of case descriptions into situations which can indeed be deemed exploitation and abusive situations which do not amount to exploitation. . . preliminary remarks three preliminary comments should be made in relation to the presentation of the case ma terial. first of all these are second hand reports obtained in interviews with respondents. of course it is not possible to attach the same value to this material as it would be to facts found by a court. the second remark relates to the benchmark for categorising the cases. the question is whether they fall within the provisions of article f dutch criminal code. exploita tion per se is not criminalized as thb but rather intended exploitation in one of the con texts described in sub paragraphs and of paragraph of the article. this means that if the situation qualifies as exploitation here this does not automatically constitute conduct that can be prosecuted under article f criminal code. finally the broadened thb clause entered into force on january . however in order to research whether exploitation occurs independent of any criminalisation bnrm asked the respondents about the period from onwards. . . qualifying criterion for the cases in order to formulate a sharply defined criterion on the basis of which a distinction can be drawn between abuses amounting to exploitation within the meaning of article f crimi nal code and other abuses we must refer to that type of exploitation in the non comprehensive enumeration paragraph with the determinative elements constituting the lowest threshold. after all these elements have to be found in any event for a situation to please refer to . . and chapter for an analysis of the article on thb. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur be covered by article f criminal code. it goes without saying that more serious forms of abuse then also amount to exploitation. the form of exploitation with the lowest requirements mentioned in paragraph is forced or compulsory labour or services see box below . an actual or alleged lack of freedom on the part of the victim is also a fixed element of exploitative situations. the criterion for exploitation applied by bnrm is accordingly based on the combination of a lack of freedom as a constant factor and at least one of the following practices which indi cate forced or compulsory labour or services force including threats of physical or sexual violence or the reporting of illegal residence or employment misuse of authority arising from the actual circumstances or abuse of a vulnerable position bad working conditions including unreasonable working hours underpayment and dan gerous work without the requisite protection multiple dependence including working to pay off debts and being dependent on the same individual for employment and for example accommodation and identity papers. a situation therefore amounts to exploitation if these one of these problems exists and the victim is not free to leave the situation or reasonably thinks that he or she is not free to do so. in practice the constant factors and variable factors may overlap. the lack of freedom for example may be intertwined with excessive working conditions or the abuse of a vulnerable position may be so severe that the victim has no real choice but to suffer exploitation. when assessing a situation all the particulars of the case such as the duration the degree of organi sation and the age of the victim must be taken into consideration. explanation of the criterion in order to compare the determinative elements of the different forms of exploitation enumerated in article f paragraph dutch criminal code bnrm reverted to internationally accepted defini tions. articles a of the palermo protocol and . .c of the european framework decision derive con cepts from article of the convention on forced labour of the international labour organisation ilo article echr and article of the united nations slavery convention in conjunction with article of the un supplementary convention on the abolition of slavery. based on the existing in ternational definitions forced or compulsory labour or services is the least serious form of exploita tion mentioned in article f criminal code. in terms of article of the ilo convention on forced labour forced or compulsory labour is all work exacted from a person under the menace of any penalty and for which that person has not of fered himself voluntarily. apart from this practice article echr also prohibits slavery and servi tude. in its judgment dated july in the case siliadin vs. france the european court of human rights set out the order of the practices prohibited in article echr. the court followed the defini tion in article of the ilo convention as regards the interpretation of forced labour and deemed the menace of a penalty to exist when employers deliberately stimulate the fear of being picked up by the this threshold need not however be a final one. since the enumeration is non comprehensive it is impossible to rule out a potentially wider interpretation of the concept of exploitation in case law. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry police of an unaccompanied and undocumented minor working for them. thus there does not need to be the menace of a penalty in the literal sense. servitude involves an even greater deprivation of personal freedom. though it does not involve a claim to rights attached to ownership it is in line with slavery in terms of gravity. according to the judgment of the echr mentioned above it is the situation where someone is obliged to provide services living in the house of his keeper without the possibility of changing his status. it would make sense if the same applies to the servitude like practices in article f paragraph dutch criminal code. it follows that cases must be regarded as exploitation as defined in article f paragraph if they in corporate at least the elements of forced or compulsory labour or services. these elements the men ace of any penalty and being available for the work involuntarily can be translated into concrete indi cations. anderson and rogaly have done this for research on forced labour in the united king dom. they mention four indications violence or the threat of violence other forms of force such as debt bondage or the confiscation of identity papers excessive dependence on an employer or third party and other abuses such as extremely long working hours and degrading accommodation. ac cording to the authors none of these indications amounts to forced labour in itself but someone is deemed to be a victim of forced labour if he suffers from at least one of the indications and reasonably thinks that he is not free to walk away from the situation. . . categorisation of the cases when applying this criterion exploitation as defined in article f criminal code was found in of the collected case descriptions. again though it should be noted that this criterion cannot be equated with punishable thb. nor does table . reflect the scale of the phenomenon. of the case studies could not be classified as either exploitation in the netherlands in the period from to or not. table . classification of cases classification cases exploitation no exploitation other prior to outside the netherlands borderline cases inadequate information total trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the fact that the research produced only two cases that were found to be borderline cases should not conceal the fact that there was intensive debate about a far higher number of cases. the following section presents the most important points of this debate. obvious exploitation but first two cases which present obvious instances of exploitation. the first example relates to domestic work. the victim was not paid she had limited freedom of movement was in timidated and maltreated. she was also in a vulnerable position and had to work for her in laws on whom she depended for both her accommodation and her residence permit. the fact that she suffered the abuse for months on end does not indicate free will but rather that she had no reasonable alternative. the case of the indian daughter in law exploitation when she was k was subject to an arranged marriage to a dutch national of indian origins. the marriage was arranged by the parents and in exchange for their consent k s parents received a piece of land. there were however false pretences because when k arrived in the netherlands it turned out that her husband was mentally retarded. it was not a true marriage. the husband and wife who lived with his parents slept apart and k was treated as household help. she was confined to the house and could not go out alone or take dutch lessons. she was socially isolated and not allowed to contact her family or friends in india. her jewellery clothing and passport were taken away from her by her father in law. k was threatened and abused by various members of the family. her father in law tried to abuse her sexually. he succeeded in doing so after eight months at which point k fled from the house. she was taken to a shelter by a passer by where she related her experiences as a sort of mail order bride and domestic worker for her in laws. she reported to the police divorced and tried in vain through a lawyer to recover her belongings her former in laws. her attempt to secure an independent residence permit was unsuccessful but she did not want to return to india from fear of being ostra cised. her parents wanted nothing more to do with her after the breakdown of her marriage . k trav elled illegally to some relatives in the united kingdom. the second example of exploitation concerns ukrainian temporary workers who were smuggled into the netherlands. as a result of the practices of a malafide job contractor rack rent landlord associated with the employment agency they ended up indebted and working without pay. the case of the ukrainian agency workers exploitation about ukrainians mostly men travelled to the netherlands via an employment agency. for the trip they had bought fake forged passports from the employment agency for . some paid the agency one time the monthly salary that is promised to them between and . the people were instructed to contact a particular ukrainian in the netherlands who would get them jobs so that they could settle the outstanding debts to the employment agency. this middleman put them to work the discussion was mostly internal to bnrm. some cases were discussed anonymously in an expert meeting organised by bnrm on the definition and scope of the concept of exploitation in relation to thb in december . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry illegally in dutch horticulture and construction companies. the businesses hiring the workers con cluded all of the arrangements on working conditions with the malafide job contractor. the migrants worked hours a day without being paid. their debts continued to accumulate because they had to pay the contractor between and per person per month for group accommodation in small houses. the job contractor misused the debt situation threatening those who protested against the la bour conditions with the prospect that they would be given no work at all while their debt would con tinue to increase. several ukrainians who escaped from this situation tried to report the situation to the police. the police did not however see sufficient clues for an investigation. cases that are obviously not exploitation cases where no labour or services is provided cannot constitute exploitation in the sense of thb. the following case description is an example of this though abuse of another person s vulnerable position is clear here. robbing partner no exploitation a dutch woman s aged lived in a supervised home because of psychiatric problems and lack of anywhere else to stay. s who appeared to maintain casual sexual contacts with several young men from the antilles embarked on a relationship with b . s indicated though that she was afraid of him and there were signs that he had raped her. one day b violently forced s to hand over her cash card and code and withdrew all the money from her account amounting to a few hundred euros. he also stole her bicycle. after the incident s broke up the relationship and reported the theft to the police. the police suspected that b to be a member of a criminal gang and started an investigation. labour situations in which abuse occurs that is not serious enough to be described as slav ery like practices also fall outside the scope of article f criminal code. for example double shifts in a factory no exploitation t had financial problems when he was offered the prospect of a permanent contract with the factory he worked in. in exchange for the promise of a fixed contract t had to do extra shifts in the holiday pe riod. t often worked two successive shifts and was not given the obligatory days of rest. after this heavy period had passed the promise turned out to be false. t was dismissed. he protested but did not challenge the dismissal formally. as a result of his unemployment his family became homeless. borderline cases various questions arise when considering concrete case studies of non sexual exploitation particularly with cases where there are several substandard circumstances none of which on its own amounts to gross abuse. one question in relation to a borderline case is whether it can be considered exploitation and if so on what conditions if someone collaborates in a fraud benefiting another person without the co perpetrator being aware of this or profiting from it. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the case of benefit payment fraud borderline case in a from iraq obtained refugee status. in the asylum proceedings he had stated that he had a wife and child. a travelled back to iraq where he entered into an arranged marriage with h who was and brought her to the netherlands. because of her age he arranged false identity papers for h. they also brought h s five year old nephew pretending he was their son. h and her nephew obtained a resi dence permit based on their false papers. her mother followed some years later pretending to be a s mother something h was unaware of. a alleged that h s mother owed him for this. h and a had two children of their own. h started off taking dutch lessons but she had few social con tacts. a abused her physically and sexually and also abused the children particularly the nephew. a was generally out of work and he neglected his wife and the children. h almost never had any money and she was unaware that her husband had for years been obtaining family benefit payments child benefit and a benefit payment for her mother. it was not clear what he spent this money on. a always kept his wife s original and fake documents in his possession. in h fled with her children to an emergency centre for battered women where she learned about such basic things as using an atm. h reported a to the police and applied for a divorce. h and her mother also applied for social security benefits under the false names they were still using. in a got into trouble because he was working while receiving benefits. he then reported the ille gal immigration of h and her mother who had by this time obtained dutch nationality under their false identities. the state reclaimed of social security from them. the use of false identities also had negative consequences h s dutch citizenship. and the police could not or would not associate the report of abuse h had made under her false name with the subsequent reports under her real name. h is now working illegally in the catering industry. she and her nephew are receiving psychiatric treatment. the other children have been referred to child welfare. a lives close to h and continues to threaten her. in this complex scenario h did not at least initially as a minor consciously use the fake documents. the fact that she continued to use the false identity in the netherlands is related to her fear of and multiple dependence on her violent husband. does this make her a vic tim of exploitation in the sense of thb are services being provided if someone unwittingly collaborates in another person s fraud does the qualification change if it becomes clearer that the fraud is committed under coercion as in the following case case of participation in child smuggling exploitation l a woman from pakistan was married in pakistan to k of pakistani origin but living in the nether lands. when l came to the netherlands she also took with her in addition to her own son from a pre vious marriage against her will her brother s six year old son. with false papers he arrived in the netherlands ostensibly as l s son. k had arranged this with l s brother. l did not agree because she thought it would be better for the child to stay with his parents. she was however put under extreme pressure to cooperate and sign the papers. all of this had to remain a secret in the netherlands. l s husband seriously mistreated her and her real son. there are indications that the child benefit for both young boys was sent to l s brother in pakistan. in any event k did not spend it on the children. after some time l fled from home because of the violence. she only took her own son with her. she ended up in a reception centre via the teacher of her integration course. l reported to the police and di vorced k but she said nothing about her nephew who was still living with k. social workers only exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry found out about him when transferring the child benefit into l s name. l said that she had kept quiet from fear of getting into problems because of her share in the fraud. out of concern about the boy a report was made to the child abuse advisory and reporting centre. points for discussion it is argued at . . that victims lack of freedom to leave an exploitative situation can be in ferred from very poor working conditions. this is all the more so if these conditions are linked with abuse of a vulnerable situation due to illegal residence. at the same time it is possible that someone consistently works excessive hours for per hour but cannot be de scribed as a victim of exploitation. case of iranian asylum seeker no exploitation d has been in the netherlands with his wife and children since . the family is awaiting follow up asylum proceedings. they can no longer stay at an asylum seekers centre and receive assistance. they have found accommodation via a foundation which pays for gas and electricity and water. d does not however want to take an allowance from the foundation. he provides for this himself by working ille gally in a turkish coffee house. he rides km on his moped to get to work. he does not get travel ex penses and earns a week working five days a week for ten hours a day. he daren t ask for a raise as the coffee house is not very successful. despite the under payment d has a good relationship with his boss. d understands his own situation and wants at least to do something to provide for his family. in this case the employment conditions are poor but there is a reasonable alternative for the employee in the shape of an allowance from the foundation supporting him. in the discussion of actual cases the requirement of a perceived lack of freedom to get out was put into perspective for those situations where one person deliberately puts another person to work in dangerous conditions. case of endangerment exploitation v an undocumented migrant in the netherlands worked for an agricultural business using a packag ing machine under great time pressure. one day his hand was caught in the machine. v lost two fingers as a result of the accident. he was summarily dismissed without any help or compensation from the employer. v became partially disabled. a ngo telephoned the health and safety inspectorate on his behalf to ask whether any action could be taken against the employer. v did not however make a full report fearing negative consequences for himself and the undocumented migrants among his former colleagues. the hsi did not therefore know which business was involved and could not take any tar geted action. the ngos okia and stek described the hsi response to this case. three regional hsi of fices were asked what would happen if the man fully reported the accident. all three offices answered that there was a chance of the aliens police being notified of his illegal residence this case was described by an employee at hsi and an employee from the ngo in question. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur benseddik bijl . according to the ngos this case which dates back to before ar ticle f criminal code entered into force illustrates the incompatibility of the two func tions of the hsi of both enforcing proper working conditions and combating illegal em ployment. it is not necessary for the exploiter to be exercising control over the victim at the workplace or in an employer employee relationship. several such cases were collected and this is one of them. case of the son in a family business exploitation k was a solitary youth of turkish kurd origins. his father was a violent man. when he was k and his stepmother reported the abuse to the police. k s father was convicted and sent to prison. the man had a contracting firm whose only permanent employee was k s uncle who derived his residence permit from this employment. while his father was serving the prison sentence k had to keep the business going. this meant he could no longer attend school. when business turned bad his father threatened him from prison and ordered him out of the family home. k wanted to go and stay with his uncle who but his father would not allow this. k ended up in a crisis reception centre. a child protec tion order was issued since k s father was in prison and his stepmother had no parental authority over him. k appeared to have skipped school more often although he had not wanted to because he had to work for his father or interpret for his stepmother. here because of his father s misuse of authority and threats of violence the youngster had no choice but to work without pay at the expense of his education and in breach of legisla tion on working hours for year olds. . risk sectors . . introduction in which sectors of the dutch economy does exploitation occur the literature often associ ates migrant work illegal or otherwise with d jobs dirty dangerous and degrading. in the netherlands as well the work done by immigrants who are not entitled to work here is for the most part poorly valued and poorly paid. illegal employment is a substantial element of the underbelly of the dutch economy van der leun vervoorn . employers find it difficult to get other workers for unpleasant and low paid jobs. the risk sectors for labour exploitation overlap with the d jobs. abuse is often identified in labour intensive produc tion processes where poorly paid workers perform simple tasks. there is a demand for the cheapest and most flexible labour certainly where profit margins are tight staffing costs form an important part of the production costs and the work requires no expertise. this in creases the risk that workers are put to work in bad conditions whether or not arranged by malafide labour subcontractors. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry the ilo points to three trends which partly explain extremely poor working condi tions in industrialised nations the supply of labour migrants the ever increasing competi tion among producers and the deregulation of the employment market. cyrus also points to the links between exploitation and the internationalisation of the labour market international competition among businesses and the unequal distribution of wealth between different countries. in this context labour exploitation can be considered as the dark side of globalisation cyrus . employers seem to impose substandard conditions more easily on foreign workers anderson . in the west the informal economy is part of the survival strategy for those who have no access to the formal labour market. while the informal economy and illegal employment are two different things they often coincide. the extent of illegal employment in the nether lands is apparent from research carried out in by the ministry of social affairs and employment szw on the level of compliance with the aliens employment act. an anonymous survey of employers indicated that of the respondents had employed one or more migrants in the previous twelve months in breach of the act mosselman . it was estimated that of the foreigners working illegally came from the new eu member states in central and eastern europe. the percentage of employers in the three most rele vant sectors who indicated that they had illegally employed workers in the past twelve months was in the agriculture sector in the catering industry and in construc tion mosselman . the risk of illegality is particularly high in employment agencies of the employers stated that they did not always check the documents of workers they hired through an employment agency. it would be interesting to know whether this is a con nection with the deregulation of this sector. because of its clandestine nature the informal economy remains invisible to some extent. corrupt facilitators profit from this. according to hsi inspectors malafide labour subcon tracting often takes the form of short lived and invisible businesses. other respondents also mention in relation to wrongs employment brokers who are not registered with the chamber of commerce and or who regularly disappear through bankruptcy or otherwise in order to minimise their chances of being caught or to escape from their financial obliga tions such as paying employees. in such a circuit it is difficult for workers to defend them selves against abuse certainly if they are for instance undocumented or socially isolated. it is clear from the collated cases concerning domestic work and ethnic entrepreneurship that exploitation often occurs in concealed situations. the link between ethnic entrepreneurship and the risk of exploitation is not a simple one though. it can be just as much a safety net as a stranglehold for immigrants with few prospects in the labour market. the informal economy has been defined as productive or work activities hidden from or ignored by the state for tax social security and or labour law purposes but which are legal in all other respects or as activities aimed at producing a positive effect on income for which the terms of legislation and regulations applicable are not met cgkr p. . the informal economy s contribution to the gross domestic product in the european union is estimated at between and notice from the commission dated june . the licensing system for employment agencies was abolished in . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur finally the risk of exploitation outside the sex industry appears to be greater in some geo graphical areas than in others. thus there is an increased risk in the major cities and sur rounding agricultural areas because of the relatively large populations of undocumented migrants in those cities. in the border areas exploitative employers can increase employees dependence and ignorance of their rights by housing them in one country and putting them to work in the other. cross border exploitation is also harder to observe and detect. . . relevant sectors the case studies collected by bnrm confirm this general picture. they are drawn from sectors but as table . shows respondents knew of most cases from the catering industry domestic work employment agency work and agriculture horticulture all sectors in which illegal employment is known to be quite common. catering includes a range of facilities but the main subcategory is that of chinese restaurants. the cases of abuse associated with domestic work often occur in a family context. table . number of cases with indications of exploitation per sector sector number of cases with indications of exploitation catering of which chinese restaurants domestic work including looking after children of which cases within the family employment agency work agriculture and horticulture food industry factory work crime including fraud construction industry transport and logistics markets and shops cleaning other if restricted to the cases that qualify as exploitation the distribution across sectors looks slightly different. the total in the table exceeds the total number of case descriptions collected because one case may involve several sectors. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry table . number of cases regarding situations involving exploitation per sector sector number of cases with situations of exploitation catering of which chinese restaurants domestic work including looking after children of which cases within the family employment agency work agriculture and horticulture food industry factory work crime including fraud construction industry transport and logistics markets and shops cleaning other . . discussion of the sectors in question domestic work there is no strong tradition of paid domestic work in the netherlands by contrast with some other european countries. this is now changing rapidly. the growing number of double income households and the increasing average age of the population mean that the demand for affordable childcare and other personal services is on the increase. the literature contains indications that illegal employment in private household is also on increasing with a concomitant risk of abuse van der leun vervoorn . the examples bnrm found illustrate this risk. domestic work is rather invisible and hard to check. it can lead to social isolation and multi ple dependence issues particularly for live in migrant domestic workers. there is also no collective labour agreement or usually organisation in a trade union. these factors make it difficult for domestic workers to defend themselves against abuse. while illegal residence and employment contribute to these situations migrants who are allowed to work also fall victim to exploitation in this sector. the total in the table exceeds the total number of cases qualified as exploitation because one case may involve several sectors. in june mediation by a number of migrant organisations such as the commission for filipino migrant workers resulted in the first group of illegal filipino migrant domestic workers becoming members of the abva kabo. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the case of the moroccan girl exploitation when she was z s destitute mother sent her to a moroccan family living in the netherlands. some of the children in this family were older than z and they lived in a small house. z had to do everything in the house as a hour servant. she received no wages and did not attend school. the girl was not allowed to go out and her only contact was with visitors to the house. she was intimidated and beaten. after a few years of this z ran away and with the help of a passer by and the police ended up in an emergency shelter. z who had no relatives in the netherlands had fallen seriously behind in her de velopment. she was given a residence permit and was placed first in an assisted group living facility and then in a home for people who are slightly mentally challenged. it is not known whether a report was filed against the family for whom l worked for years. this girl had to be on call the whole day was not allowed to go to school or to play outside she was physically abused and received only board and lodgings in return for her work. on all of these points the case corresponds with the siliadin case in which the european court of human rights established servitude. three special types of employer were found among the cases descriptions in relation to do mestic work the victim s relatives au pair host families and foreign diplomats. domestic work for relatives most recorded cases of slavery like situations of domestic work occur within family rela tionships. some spouses daughters daughters in law and step daughters are reduced to unpaid maids. these women are often legal immigrants whose residence permit initially depends on their relationship with a partner or relative s . in some of these cases the ques tion arises as to the significance of the element of work in relation to the total situation of abuse and lack of freedom. but also when does a normal albeit traditional allocation of du ties turn into disguised employment and exploitation in the following case studies the vic tims were put to work as household drudge in the homes of their violent in laws. case of turkish marriage immigrant exploitation a grew up in a traditional environment in turkey. she only attended elementary school. when in her early twenties she met a dutch man of turkish origin. he told her he had a good income and his own house in the netherlands and that she would have prospects for further development there. they mar ried. a came to the netherlands and obtained a residence permit to stay with her husband. it turned out that her husband did not have a house so they lived with his parents where a was beaten and hu miliated by her husband and her in laws including her sister in law and mother in law. a was just or dered around and forced to do a lot of household work. when she did not have to work a was con fined to her room. a s husband was often away without her knowing where he was. a ended up being socially isolated. eventually she fled and ended up in a women s shelter by way of the police. she re ported the abuse and arranged for a divorce. a had to receive treatment for psychological problems connected with the abuse. she heard from her grandfather that her former in laws were slandering her. the women s shelter worried about possible reprisals by her in laws or her own family. after a in siliadin vs. france see . . and chapter . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry few moths a left for an unknown destination. she possibly had fallen in love. she was reported to the police as a missing person. case of turkish marriage immigrant exploitation d a poorly educated turkish woman was not yet when she came legally to the netherlands to live with her dutch husband whose family came from the same village in turkey as hers. it was an ar ranged marriage. d and her husband lived in his parents home where she was obliged to do all of the household work. she was physically abused by the husband and humiliated by him and his parents. d was not allowed to go out alone. because she had to stay in the house she was virtually unable to make any contacts outside the family or learn about the dutch language and society. d was also unable to talk freely with friends or family from turkey. d returned to turkey on one occasion after her migra tion. she tried to stay there but her parents sent her back with her husband. in the end d came to a women s shelter. she needed a lot of assistance. after years of being treated in this way her self esteem was very low. d applied for a divorce and an independent residence permit. she also reported the situation to the police which led to a police investigation. bearing in mind the violence that women in these situations have had to endure it is no sur prise that social workers concentrate on other issues than possible exploitation. domestic work as an au pair the principal aim of residence as an au pair ought to be to learn about dutch society and cul ture. for this purpose an au pair receives a one year residence permit linked to a particular host family. the au pair lives with that family and does undertakes light household work on the basis of equality with the members of the family and in exchange for board and an al lowance. there are conditions attached to this work so that the au pair and the host family are not in an employer employee relationship. if the agreement between the au pair and the family is primarily oriented towards working they are in breach of the au pair regulations and the rights and obligations attached to an employment situation such as paying the minimum wage then apply. there are fairly regular reports in the media about abuse of the au pair system giving the impression that many au pairs whether or not they have the appropriate residence permit are actually working as underpaid maids or child minders. in belgium which has a similar au pair system and similar concerns raised in the media it has been asked what the use of this system is. there are after all other options for cultural exchange which do not put people into the precarious position of having to do certain work whilst not enjoying the legal status of an employee bucquoye . in the netherlands the ministry of justice commissioned an evaluation of the use of the au pair rules. this study showed that some of the au pairs worked harder or for longer than was the au pair can move from one family to another provided that she and the new family meet the requirements. the residence permit will still last for only one year. the au pair would therefore only be available to the new family for less than one year kohlmann . in the united kingdom an au pair visa is issued for two years anderson et al. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur permitted and that of them had complaints about their stay. these related mostly to the amount of work and how they were treated. the evaluation disclosed hardly any indications of serious abuse miedema et al. . as a result of this evaluation a temporary complaints desk for au pairs was set up at the im migration and naturalisation service immigratie en naturalisatiedienst ind . this desk about which au pairs and host families were informed during the application for the resi dence permit received just six reports between june and december . the number of au pair residence permits issued per annum is on average since . of these six complaints most were submitted via au pair agencies and related to more work than was permitted. there were no signs of violence in any of the cases. if there is abuse on the part of the host family the permit is revoked. if the abuse leads to a fine for example under the aliens employment act or a conclusive conviction by the court the host family is ex cluded from the au pair scheme for five years. bnrm has not found any cases of exploitation of au pairs who were in the netherlands for less than a year and living with the appointed host family. this does not mean that it is not necessary to remain alert to exploitation of au pairs who fail to meet the conditions of their residence permits. neither the evaluation nor the ind complaints desk provides informa tion about the situation of au pairs who have been in the netherlands for more than a year or who have changed host families without amending their residence permit. nor is it likely that an au pair without the proper documents or without the prospect of another host fam ily would call the ind with a complaint. other organisations do however have an insight into the employment situations of undocumented au pairs . the following case study came from an ngo which supports undocumented au pairs and other migrants. case of the au par exploitation v a philippino girl came to the netherlands as an au pair. at her first host family despite other agree ments on paper v not only had to look after the children but also had to do increasing housework and work on saturdays. without her knowing it v became undocumented because the host family had not registered her. a row broke out and v went to another family where she encountered the same problems there was no residence permit and v was given too much work to do. v went to a third host family. her duties there included cleaning the house and the swimming pool walking the dog cooking for the and year old sons and being on hand in the evenings and at weekends to serve guests. v was in fact a maid and she earned between and per month. she did not have her own pass port and was afraid of the lady of the house who treated her badly. after more than years of illegal residence v went to an ngo which tried to mediate. her boss said she would sort out v s registration and insurance but some months later the situation had not changed. then v s host family offered her a loan of to build a house in the philippines. the ngo warned that this would increase her de pendence but v still took the loan. v s working conditions continued to be poor and she was not al lowed to rest when sick for example. when it became too much for her she left. because the situation was beyond mediation the ngo collected v s things from the family. v gave back the money she had borrowed and got her passport in exchange. the ngo wants to ask a lawyer whether she could claim back wages. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry bnrm did not find any exploitation of au pairs with valid residence permits au pairs who have been in the netherlands for less than a year and are living with the host family for whom the permit was issued. nonetheless. the au pair status involves particular risks. cer tainly if au pairs stay in the netherlands for more than a year or change host families with out reporting the fact then can find themselves in an extremely vulnerable position. domestic work for foreign diplomats the third group of migrant domestic workers at an increased risk are those working for for eign diplomats. they are vulnerable not only because of multiple dependence and being rather invisible but also because of their employers legal status diplomatic immunity can extend to conduct of a diplomat acting as a private individual and the fact that dutch law does not automatically apply to their employment situation. migrant domestics working for diplomats have a special position under both the law relat ing to immigration law and labour law. certain diplomats can bring a limited number of foreign employees to the netherlands under a privileged document issued by the ministry of foreign affairs ministerie van buitenlandse zaken buza . there are some individu als with such a document in the netherlands. buza checks the underlying employment con tract before it issues the document. these checks have become more rigorous in recent years. diplomats are now informed of the dutch minimum wage and are supposed to agree at least that level of wages. the checks do have limitations though. diplomats and their em ployees are free for example to have the contract governed by law other than dutch law. literature e.g. connor shows that these circumstances can result in exploitation within diplomatic households. bnrm was informed about one case of exploitation in this context in the netherlands. case of the domestic worker of a diplomat exploitation a year old ethiopian p came to the netherlands on a privileged document to work as a house keeper and child minder to an egyptian diplomat. the employer paid for her trip and fetched p at schiphol airport. p immediately handed her passport to him and never got it back. p had to work virtu ally non stop for the diplomat s family. she looked after the children and did domestic work such as washing cooking and cleaning. p had no days off and had to be available for her employers on a hour basis. she lived with the family but did not have her own room. she slept in the childrens room. she got little to eat and little sleep. she was not allowed to go out alone and was locked up in the house when her employers were away. nor was p allowed to attend her own church as her employers tried to convert her. the lady of the house hit p sometimes with a shoe or a toy. she also punched her and pulled her hair. p was allowed to telephone her mother once every two months. the contract set out a monthly salary of . the parties allegedly agreed that of that would be sent to p s family in ethiopia. in fact however p worked for board and lodging. she only received a small amount for clothing on two occasions. p managed to escape after about three years. the diplomat reported to buza that p had gone missing and her residence entitlement lapsed. p applied for asylum. during these proceedings nothing was done with p s statements concerning the criminal acts of her employer. the application was rejected but p stayed on in the netherlands. she got in touch with a lawyer via the stv and reported the abuse trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur and unlawful deprivation of liberty by her former employers to the police. p who was illiterate could not give a full name or complete address in her report. little was done with the report because of the lack of information and the diplomatic status of the employers. these factors also made it difficult to lodge a claim for wages. eventually her lawyer was given the employer s full name by the government but by then he was no longer posted in the netherlands. even if the employer had paid the agreed the wage would have been below dutch minimum wages. the contract was also in breach of the minimum standards under dutch labour law on other points. according to buza today no document would not be issued in such a case the above case dates from or . buza has little information of the actual living and working conditions of the domestic workers with a privileged document and it almost never receives complaints by them. this might mean that there are few cases of abuse or that employees are unaware that they can go to buza with complaints. the latter option is not inconceivable as these migrant work ers may lead an isolated existence may not have had their rights explained to them and never have to go to the ministry. the dutch government could adopt a more proactive pol icy as regards this specific group of migrants and their employers as happens in belgium for instance. belgian policy in relation to migrant domestic workers with foreign diplomats the ministries of foreign affairs and of employment in belgium have embarked on an information campaign aimed at domestic workers their employers and front line services about the rights of mi grant domestic workers. the campaign partly focussing on diplomatic staff was initiated by ngos and is supported by trade unions and employer organisations. moreover the belgian ministry of for eign affairs maintains contact with migrant domestics working for foreign diplomats. prior to issuing the visa it meets with the domestic worker at the belgian embassy to discuss the labour contract. once the domestic worker arrives in belgium she must collect an id card in person at the ministry. at this point she again talks to an official. the employee needs to renew the id card each year at the ministry. this is an opportunity to ask questions or mention any problems. the domestic workers know that they can also contact the ministry at other times and they do. if they complaint of exploitation the ministry refers them to organisations offering assistance. in the year this happened on six occa sions. agriculture and horticulture two ngos okia and stek published in a study on illegal employment in the green house sector in a region known as the westland. the authors found that employment condi tions for undocumented workers here are deteriorating as a result of increases of scale in creasing computerization growing international competition and the change from a supply driven market into a market led by demand in which growers were dependent on the wishes of ever larger and stronger consumers benseddik bijl . in this context the farmers try to keep down wage costs and increase productivity. this means that the personnel capac this also includes auctions of flowers and vegetables. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry ity has to coincide with changing commercial pressures while there was a shortage of avail able legal workers for peak periods. the authors report that it became obvious in when new legislation on employment agencies wet allocatie arbeidskrachten door interme diairs waadi came into effect that this seasonal work is an important market for em ployment brokers. their obligation to be licensed was abolished by waadi and within a few months the number of employment agencies operating in the westland grew from a few dozen to about including many small scale intermediaries of turkish descent. illegal employment in the westland now largely involves temporary employment agency workers benseddik bijl . the research by okia and stek also shows that the conditions are worse for illegal em ployment agency workers than for the diminishing numbers of illegal workers employed di rectly by the growers. abuses include underpayment irregular or non payment no bonuses for overtime or night work being forced to work while ill or pregnant not being allowed to talk while working and being shouted at. there were also reports of employers provoking fights which they would then use an excuse to fire permanent employees benseddik bijl . the picture given by okia and stek is supported by the responses from the amf teams to bnrm. ten of the fourteen teams had received indications of exploitation in the horticul tural business. for seven teams this was also the case in other forms of agriculture. inspec tors mainly see underpayment long working hours and poor accommodation. in one large farming business which had repeatedly violated the aliens employment act for example six illegal polish and bulgarian employees shared one small room there was one shower for at least twenty men and there were no emergency exits. another farmer had people sleeping in a tiny and cold storage room. a strawberry grower had slovakian employees sleeping on pallets next to rotten fruit. one grower who paid three weeks wages for four weeks work told the hsi that this was standard practice. the respondents also refer to the competition between agricultural employment agencies and the part played by malafide contracting firms. some gangmasters of turkish origins al legedly put turkish speaking bulgarians to work illegally for growers without agreeing any hourly rate for them. there is an impression that payment is generally below minimum wage levels. the following case study concerns a boy illegally employed working long hours and being underpaid. case of the somali boy exploitation r a year old somali had been in the netherlands illegally for two and a half years. r spoke a little dutch and rented a room from distant relations. r worked in a farming business from am to pm six days a week. the agreed hourly rate was and r got his meals at work. three other africans also the results of enquiries with the amf teams and siod investigators might also have been determined by the selection of the sectors prioritised by the hsi and the siod. the hsi also sees dangerous sleeping arrangements for undocumented migrant workers in other sectors for example in the vicinity of chemicals and without escape routes. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur worked there. r got on with his employer but he was paid less than had been agreed. when r asked the farmer about this there was always some excuse. he would sometimes give r or . as in other sectors checks on compliance with the aliens employment act have intensified in agriculture and horticulture in recent years. the fine for employing someone illegally was increased with effect from january . it is difficult to assess whether these meas ures are resulting in fewer abuses in employment situations. now that labour exploitation is punishable as thb inspectors and special investigators will have to be alert on the shop floor for any signs of excess. various factors make it difficult to pick up on these signs. first of all every special investi gation service has a specific function and appropriate powers. the workplace checks by the amf teams for instance are aimed at checking compliance by employers with the aliens employment act. inspectors do not generally ask questions about working hours wages or accommodation. usually the inspectors only find out about the particulars of an employ ment situation if they establish an infringement of the aliens employment act. it is also possible that the employer the intermediary and the worker all have an interest or think they do in making sure that a situation is not discovered. employment agency work the growing demand for flexible and inexpensive labour and the risks associated with this are particularly visible in the temporary employment. it has been estimated that employ ment agencies provide work for between and undocumented migrants and some of the malafide employment brokers are also known to be active in the illegal rental of accommodations van der laan . all the teams of the hsi co operating mention the employment agency sector as one where abuses occur. two of the examples they provided relate to poles in the meat processing industry who received an advance payment but no fur ther payments at all and ukrainians who worked for hours a day for . per hour. the ukrainian workers were accommodated in tents in november and were obliged to buy their meals from the gangmasters men they were clearly afraid of according to the respondent. the siod also deals with malafide employment agencies. illegal labour subcontractors whether dutch or of foreign origins not only put people to work illegally but trade in false documents underpay migrant workers and house them expensively in accommodation that is cramped dirty or a fire hazard. one investigator reported threats violence against employees and the illegal possession of weapons. the workers concerned were primarily men from brazil western africa afghanistan turkey central and eastern europe and portugal. in the hsi prepared more than reports for fines for illegal employment out of about inspections in the agricultural sector. from an average of to a maximum of for an employer who is a natural person and for an employer who is a legal entity for each person employed illegally. the fine is increased by if the employer has been fined for the same offence before. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry representatives of the employer associations in this sector highlight the responsibility of those who hire the employees they should only do business with certificated employment agencies. they also want to distance themselves from exploitative intermediaries supplying illegal labour. according to a director of one of the sector organisations the criminal con duct of certain gangmasters is wrongly attributed to the entire sector. this raises questions about the self regulatory powers of the employment agency sector. the fact is that there are malafide labour mediators who narrow the gap between illegal employment and the criminal circuit which can result in excesses van der leun vervoorn . sometimes there are elusive business practices small companies regularly operating under different names. other cases however involve large scale employment arrangements. case of portuguese employment agency workers exploitation a dutch trade union and a belgian one collected complaints from portuguese employment agency workers who had worked for the dutch employment agency d using no fewer than employees in the netherlands and in belgium. d recruited people in portugal via a local bureau. these portuguese men and women often from former portuguese colonies such as brazil and mozambique could work in the netherlands legally as eu citizens. the selection procedure cost . those who were recruited travelled to the netherlands or belgium at their own expense. if they were accepted upon arrival they signed a dutch contract which often they did not understand. they agreed for example that d would receive the tax rebates and that they would only go to general medical practitioners appointed by d with being deducted from their wages for each visit to the doctor. these doctors apparently pro vided incorrect diagnoses and allowed d to examine the medical files. they work was in agriculture horticulture the food industry construction metal and timber industries and logistics. d organised ac commodation and transport to work. the company had houses each accommodating workers. former workers indicated that the accommodation was bad. while the employment contract indi cated that accommodation would be free the employees actually paid rental per month. generally speaking d housed those working in belgium in the netherlands and vice versa. the workers were registered at the address of either d or the portuguese selection bureau which clouded the situation. any worker who tried to register at the municipality where he lived was threatened with dismissal. working ten hour a day was the norm. payment for overtime was postponed for as long as possible and eventually did not happen at all. several sick or pregnant workers had to leave just before the ex piry of their extendable contract. when they were dismissed they had to leave the accommodation immediately. those who were pregnant got a bus ticket to portugal without any explanation of their rights. d also apparently employed violent tactics. the dutch government wants to address malafide labour subcontractors through the certification of employment agencies. the gangmaster licensing act in the united kingdom has introduced a licensing obligation for labour mediation in certain sectors and one of its important aims is to counter exploitation the general purpose of this bill is to make the operation of gangmasters more transparent thereby ensuring that they comply with the legal obligations they owe to their workers. the bill is designed to promote the rights of gang workers and eliminate forced labour http www.eti .org.uk z lib ukagr bill gangmstr bill no tes.pdf. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur in several cases concerning serious abuses in the employment agency sector gangmasters from ethnic minority groups recruited staff from their own or a related community. one ex ample is the case of a businessman from afghanistan who put afghan asylum seekers to work under false identities as temporary workers in garden maintenance and carpet clean ing. the hourly wage was but this was not always paid. catering abuses in the catering industry occur in a range of establishments. this often involves a combination of illegal work underpayment for example because wages are continually reduced excessively long days and bad accommodation for the workers. chinese take away restaurants form an important subcategory and are therefore discussed separately. the bnrm case studies relating to catering often involve an employer and an employee of foreign heritage from the same country of origin or with a similar cultural background. sometimes there are family links. it is mainly workers without a social network or with mul tiple dependence on the employer who are vulnerable. case of pakistani working conditions exploitation some pakistanis were working in very poor conditions in a hotel illegally twelve hours a day on aver age with virtually no days off and for in cash per week. when the workers came into conflict with the employer they were dismissed. the dismissed workers did not report to the police but did submit a claim for back wages. when the case came to court the employer stated that the plaintiffs had never worked for him. witnesses gave contradictory evidence. those who first confirmed the plain tiffs story later revoked their statements possibly due to intimidation on the part of the employer. the claim was rejected because of inadequate evidence. chinese restaurants communication with chinese labour migrants is often difficult. this is partly why the re spondents had little understanding of possible arrangements behind the degrading circum stances facing some undocumented chinese workers. sometimes it seems illegal chinese workers remain silent because despite bad working and living conditions they hope to re turn to work for their employer in the future. it is also possible that the silence is caused by fear of reprisals. this was what was suspected for example in the case of a young chinese woman found by the hsi during a workplace check at a restaurant. the woman worked on the basis of a forged document and lived above the restaurant. at the police station she stated that she earned a few euros a day. she did not want to say any more. she appeared to be afraid and had fresh burn marks on her skin possibly from cigarettes. the police sus pected abuse by her boss but could not continue the investigation without more information from the woman. the chinese restaurants where abuse was found often have small numbers of staff and a dutch owner of chinese origins. it is not unusual for the owner and his family members to also work in the business. some respondents suspect that illegal work under these condi exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry tions in the chinese catering industry is associated with other criminal activities such as ille gal gambling and document fraud. according to the respondents the owners of chinese restaurants are regularly guilty of un derpayment. one team leader at the hsi wrote that even legal employees have to cope with poor conditions. another respondent at the hsi reported that illegally employed cooks earn between and per month for six long days each week. it also happens that em ployees are paid less than the agreed wages. some people work in the chinese catering business for only board and lodging. sometimes this is no more than a mattress in the kitchen or an improvised bed in a stockroom. a place where a decent person wouldn t keep his dog according to one amf inspector. during one check several illegal chinese workers were found to sleep in a stinking shed behind the res taurant and with an outside shower. in another restaurant the hsi happened upon an em ployee whose body was covered with scabs. the man had not been treated for this and had to keep working. the case of the chinese girl exploitation y lived with her grandmother in a chinese village. when she was a man and woman from the vil lage offered to take her to europe with them. y and her grandmother accepted. during the trip the three pretended to be a family. in the netherlands the couple forced y to work as a prostitute in pri vate homes and took all the money. one day y fled. she did not know where she was and spent the night outside. the next day y went into a chinese restaurant and asked for work. y started working there for board and lodgings in the same property. she was twice transferred to other chinese restau rants. it is not known whether the restaurants were owned by the same person. y found the third res taurant too harsh and walked out. she had by then worked in restaurants for two months. y then tried to find work at an italian restaurant. the owner felt this was such a strange request from a child who could not speak any dutch that he took y home found an interpreter and contacted the authorities. y was placed in a youth care centre. the child welfare council considered the case and y ended up with a foster family learned dutch and went to school. she also received psycho social help involving the use of unsent letters she had written to her grandmother. it is not known whether y ever contacted her grandmother. the respondent thought that no police investigation was initiated in this case. some respondents consider that exploitation in chinese restaurants is associated with the payment of outstanding debts for people smuggling. however on the basis of court files and interviews about the smuggling of chinese soudijn concludes that such a link can not be established. according to him exploitation by the smuggler himself is only found with individualist smugglers who smuggle relatives or acquaintances. the individual smug gled may then not need to pay any cash to the smuggler but instead will work for him for very low remuneration. according to soudijn restaurant owners sometimes also pick up smuggled people who have just arrived in the netherlands paying off the debt for the smuggling in a lump sum in exchange for labour. with this sort of structure it is again likely that the person who has been smuggled and the employer will know each other but court files contain little information on these relationships. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur food industry at some bakeries workers earn for a whole night s work. the hsi discovered a number of bulgarians working illegally at one bakery and living in three rooms above the bakery. the rooms each with two or three mattresses were in a very poor condition and the inspec tors were astonished that people could live there. the migrants did not want to say much and appeared to be afraid of their employer landlord. they did say that they worked twelve hours a day for daily wages of about with rent deducted from that. respondents also reported serious abuse in some fish processing and meat processing companies. case of portuguese employment agency workers exploitation serious abuse of portuguese temp workers was suspected at a chicken slaughterhouse. the manage ment at the slaughterhouse was aware of abuses at the employment agency. the portuguese earned . per hour their passports were taken away and if they indicated they wanted to work somewhere else they were threatened and beaten. the workers were so intimated that they did not dare to leave. nor did they want to say anything about their employer. violations of the aliens employment act were found at the employment agency along with signs of document fraud. factory work serious abuses may also happen in production work. for example this is what the hsi dis covered in an old factory during a night time check in collaboration with the aliens police. living at the workplace the dusty space consisted of a workplace where plaster statuettes were made and a small improvised living space. the sleeping quarters measured sixteen square metres with twelve bunk beds. a small hallway contained a gas cylinder camping stove for cooking and a shower. ten men and a woman from bulgaria and romania lived and worked here. they worked six days a week and were under the impression that the job would take ten weeks. they were in the netherlands illegally and stated that they had had to hand over their passports to the owner of the business. they had been told that they would be paid when they left but they did not know how much. because they hardly had any cash they were more or less confined to the factory. crime it is mentioned in . . that criminal activity can in certain circumstances amount to forced or compulsory services. the following case illustrates that this can happen within a relation ship. this has also been found in other countries. in blood sweat and fear. workers rights in u.s. meat and poultry plants human rights watch describes violations of employment rights in the american meat processing industry. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry case in relation to coerced fraud exploitation r an unemployed year woman had debts and psychological problems when met a dutch lawyer who worked from home. he took pity on r who moved in with him. they began a relationship in which r was seriously abused physically sexually and psychologically. her partner threatened her with a knife or by tying her up and pouring methylated spirits over her. r had to receive medical treat ment on several occasions and had permanent scars. the man forced r to help him with fraudulent practices. for example he and another man committed forgery with a view to obtaining compensa tion payments. r made several false statements to the courts in this context. r s partner also saddled her with debts for instance by concluding a loan in her name. r finally ended up in a shelter for bat tered women. she reported the abuse to the police and told about the forgeries. her ex was convicted of abuse and fraud. r now requires long term assistance. construction remarkably enough only a few descriptions of serious abuse in the construction industry were found in this research. after all it is well known in the netherlands and surrounding countries that there is considerable illegal employment in this sector which increases the risk of abuse. amf inspectors do point to primarily underpayment and dependence on the employer for accommodation in this sector. polish workers apparently pay a lot for very poor accommodation sometimes in amongst the building materials. according to one team leader underpaid migrant workers are made to do the most unpleasant jobs such as demoli tion clearing up and steel bending. not being paid during illness is also mentioned. some of the poles working in construction in the netherlands work for private individuals via com patriots who find customers through brochures and adverts. the case of the ukrainian construction worker exploitation v a ukrainian was living illegally in the netherlands and found work with a belgian contractor who built and renovated houses using between ten and undocumented workers from eastern europe on each project. they were accommodated in a cabin on the building site. the first week v received the wage that had been agreed. the second week he received half pay and the third week nothing at all. v took photos of his very poor working and living conditions and recorded the employer telling him that he would not receive another cent. when v said he would go to the police the contractor sarcastically wished him good luck and told him that he would beat him up if his name was mentioned. v still went to the police but he was told that nothing could be done for him as an undocumented migrant worker. transport and logistics the hsi discovered undocumented migrants working at one business in this sector in a life threatening situation in a partly burnt out shed without any form of protection against the danger of the building collapsing. there are indications in the media and elsewhere of abuses in the ports. bnrm noted one case involving an eritrean a somali and two nigeri the chief inspector for the brussels region of the belgian hsi for example indicated that there considerable abuse and organised crime connected with illegal employment in construction there presentation by s. malomgre on . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur ans who were picked up at night at the asylum centre where they were staying to clean up the engine rooms of ships in the port of rotterdam. they were poorly paid and while it is not clear that these men were exploited it is clear that they were vulnerable to exploitation. . groups at risk . . introduction recognising indicators of exploitation is essential in preventing and combating thb out side the sex industry. it is also important for anyone who might encounter victims of labour exploitations to be able to recognise them as such. this is not always easy certainly if the in dividual in question does not present himself as a victim. the next section deals with factors that render individuals vulnerable to exploitation in employment situations. . . characteristics of potential victims for some people any job no matter how bad the circumstances presents an opportunity. the workers in the various cases described to bnrm were men and women dutch nation als and foreigners single people and couples adults and children. the only characteristic they all shared is a marginal position in the dutch labour market and or society. nationality it is impossible to determine the extent to which nationality increases vulnerability to exploi tation. it has already been noted that some national and ethnic communities forge tight knit networks in the netherlands. being a member of such a community can be a form of social capital which people can invest when settling in the netherlands or finding work. at the same time people in this situation can end up being exploited by compatriots or those who share their language. an example of this would be the turkish speaking bulgarians who were put to work in very bad conditions by malafide turkish dutch gangmasters. a wide range of nationalities was found in the bnrm research. the collected cases concern dutch portuguese polish bulgarian ukrainian georgians and russians as well as moroc cans and algerians west africans including nigerians east africans including somalis congolese turks iranians iraqis afghans pakistanis indians chinese and philippinos. a number of countries and regions such as the netherlands bulgaria and west africa are known as important countries of origin for victims of thb for sexual exploitation in the netherlands. the countries of origin currently predominant among asylum seekers include iraq iran afghanistan china and somalia. some victims of exploitation are ex asylum seekers. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry residential status migration policy determines which foreign nationals are allowed access to the netherlands and to the dutch employment market and under which conditions. the link between the current migration policy and the existence of exploitation outside the sex industry is a com plex one. vulnerability in employment situations cannot always be inferred from illegal resi dence but the restrictive policy on migration does contribute to the fact that there are ex tremely vulnerable workers. the more difficult it is for migrants to stay in the netherlands legally the more those who do come end up in circumstances which easily lead to relation ships of dependence and the chance of abuse. access to the dutch labour market is also sig nificant in this context there is a risk of exploitation when legal residence does not give adequate access to the formal labour market. the bnrm research indicates that even migrants who are in the netherlands legally may have to deal with abuse and sometimes excesses related to work. circumstances that can contribute to their vulnerability because they weaken their negotiating position in employ ment situations include limited access to the labour market language difficulties depend ence on fellow countrymen ignorance of their rights a lack of economic alternatives and fear of the authorities. some migrants residing legally in the netherlands are not permitted or have a restricted permission to work. first in this group are the asylum seekers. as long as their application is being processed they are not allowed to work. unaccompanied minor asylum seekers amas are particularly vulnerable. in response to indications that recruitment for sexual exploitation was going on in asylum reception centres a plan was developed to provide resi dents and workers with better information on thb to be able to identify problems at an earlier stage to prevent disappearances and to provide adequate assistance in good time. this project focuses on exploitation in the sex industry. it is also important however to gain greater insight into exploitation of asylum seekers from the centres in other sectors. migrants who are here in the netherlands legally for study purposes may work for a maximum of ten hours a week. for many students this is not enough to get by. according to one respondent who has many contacts with russian students in the netherlands this leads to students entering into marriages of convenience with dutch nationals or going into pros titution. the students also do other work for instance in the catering industry where their vulnerable position can be abused. students may work hours a week for example but are only on the wages books for ten hours. the other ten hours are underpaid paid from the tips or not paid at all. this does not amount to exploitation but it illustrates that the labour rights of legal immigrants can also be violated. the third group of vulnerable immigrants are those from the new eu countries who were not allowed to work without a permit in the netherlands when this report was written. al lowing these eu citizens to work in the netherlands may reduce their dependency on mala the bnrm research disclosed no cases of exploitation of amas. there are however indications that dozens of chinese and indian amas have disappeared from reception centres in recent years some of whom are suspected to have ended up being exploited. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur fide facilitators and their vulnerability on the shop floor. but it cannot be predicted what im pact the increased freedom of movement for workers within the eu will have on exploita tion in other sectors than the sex industry in the netherlands. the composition of the group of risk may just change. after all exploitative labour subcontractors and employers might well turn their attention to those looking for work from countries just beyond the new boundaries of the eu. migrants who are free to work are also exploited for instance because they are ignorant of their rights. case of the illiterate man before a a moroccan man worked legally for years in a restaurant being underpaid. a had a contract but be ing illiterate he did not understand it. when a lawyer heard how little a was being paid he sent him to his boss with the collective labour agreement which resulted in a s dismissal. there followed what the lawyer described as a sordid dismissal proceedings in which the employer appeared to have bribed people to say that a had been looking for trouble with one of his colleagues. a s wage claim was suc cessful however his boss had to pay him five years of back wages. those with a residence permit to stay with a spouse or partner have unlimited access to the employment market. but this residential status also has risks attached because it is depend ent for the first three years on the relationship for which it is issued. this can result in an imbalance of power within families and exploitation also by abusing the dependence to force the other person to work and to hand over all of her income. case of being obliged to work and hand over wages exploitation l a well educated moroccan woman was legally resident in the netherlands with her dutch husband r. when she had met r in morocco he had pretended to be wealthier than he really was. in the neth erlands they shared a room with friends of r. l became pregnant. r forced l using physical violence to work for him in a factory. l got nothing back from her wages. she did not know what r did with the money. because of r l became socially isolated. also without l s permission he made videos of them having sex which he may have sold or shown for payment. l ended up exhausted from the combina tion of work abuse pregnancy and isolation. she repeatedly reported the abuse. once her son was born l fled also because r neglected their child and she herself was unable to buy anything for the child without her income. finally it is evident that people who are in the netherlands illegally are in a vulnerable posi tion that can be abused in employment situations. while employing undocumented mi grants does not absolve employers of their obligations to the workers in question in practice they will often underpay them make them work long hours or worse without any punish ment. lawyers hsi inspectors siod investigators and social workers indicate that the in dividuals they suspect of being exploited are often very reticent about their situation. many undocumented migrants do not know their labour rights or never dare to broach the sub ject with their employers. after all for every one of them there are a dozen others. they exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry also generally want to stay out of the spotlight. if they get accommodation from their em ployers and know few people in the netherlands they have even more to lose. if an un documented worker does protest about bad working conditions some employers will threaten to report them to the aliens police or actually do. case of not lodging a wage claim no exploitation men employed illegally were placed in aliens detention following a workplace check at a container transhipment company. they all mentioned the first name of the same intermediary who had in structed them to wait in a particular spot from which they were taken to work in a different city. they did heavy loading and unloading work. the men did this for only two days by their own account. an hourly wage of had been agreed but they had not yet received anything. the lawyer suggested a to claim back wages but the men did not want this. it is not clear whether this was because they did not know from whom to claim the wages because of fear or maybe the hope of getting back to the same work. what happens if an undocumented migrant wants to report abuse in his employment situa tion to the police various respondents indicate that the police will not record the report or indicate that there is nothing they can do for an undocumented migrant. sometimes the at tempt to report an offence leads to aliens detention. case of the algerian undocumented migrant exploitation the algerian y was illegally resident in the netherlands and worked in a tearoom. at first he was paid regularly but his wages gradually diminished and eventually he received no more pay. when y took this up with his employer the latter threatened to kill him. y took the threat seriously and went to the police. he was taken into aliens detention. it is not known whether any investigation was started into the employer. gender undocumented migrants therefore form an important risk group. according to leun and vervoorn between a half and three quarters of this group probably consists of men. boys are also in the majority among unaccompanied minor asylum seekers. it is therefore to be expected that more men than women will fall victim to exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. bnrm subscribes to the expectation that the numerical relationship be tween men and women among potential victims will have changed radically with the in troduction of the new article on thb. this has consequences for how the problem is to be addressed particularly as regards the reception of victims. in the stv repeatedly indi cated that the number of reports of exploitation other than in the sex industry as well as the number of male victims was growing and that there were problems in accommodation and assistance for male victims. in belgium there a strong correlation between informing the authorities about undocumented migrants and labour exploitation cgkr p. . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur age minors generally encounter multiple dependence issues more quickly and are more vulner able than adults. exploited children are also denied rights that are specifically applicable to them such as the right to education. children therefore need extra protection. the legisla ture has taken this into account in the provisions on thb and on the employment of mi nors. the use of coercion is not a required element as regards trafficking in minors contrary to trafficking in adults. at the same time it is clear that no every situation of working chil dren amounts to exploitation. but there are special conditions applicable to work done by children. the working hours act arbeidstijdenwet and the working conditions decree arbeidsomstandighedenbesluit both specify for a range of age groups up to the age of what work can be done for how many hours and at what times. if an employer makes a child work longer or harder then this is an abuse which possibly in combination with others might amount to an excess. international courts also take minority into account in these matters. for example in the si liadin judgment of the echr mentioned earlier the age of the domestic worker played a part in establishing forced labour and services. the court stated that in particular children and other vulnerable individuals are entitled to protection from the state against such viola tions of personal integrity. the standard therefore within the dutch and european legal order is that minors have to be protected so that their fundamental rights of the child are not infringed upon as a result of employment. in practice however additional care for possible victims below the age of is not yet a given fact. several cases from the bnrm research show that illegal residence in particular can hamper the attention that is required in terms of alert reception and assistance also to report the offence to possibly exploited children. case of the chinese boy exploitation a duty lawyer met c a chinese boy. he said he was years old. the lawyer reckoned he was between and . c had been apprehended during a traffic check because he could not produce any personal identification. the dutch driver next to him did have id and was allowed to continue his journey. c was taken to the police station where he was kept for a couple of days in a police cell and then trans ferred to aliens detention. c appeared shy and not particularly talkative but said that he had been smuggled into the netherlands a few years previously had no family here but was in touch with his family in china shared a room with another man somewhere and worked in a place he was taken to and collected from by car. the lawyer did not find out anything about the nature of the work but he got the impression that apart from working the boy did nothing but eat and sleep. he did not speak a word of dutch or another european language appeared to be disoriented and knew nothing about dutch society. for his trip c had borrowed the equivalent of from a loan shark. he had a scar in the shape of a flower on his arm c said that this was done to him to remind him of the debt. c was not paid for his work but the person he worked for had said that he was sending money to c s family in china every month and so c wanted to get back to work as fast as possible. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry the lawyer spoke to c only once. because of the transfer to aliens detention he did not visit the boy again before the hearing. the aliens police interviewed c twice. the lawyer consulted with the child protection agency which was willing to process an application to place c under supervision urgently. the lawyer did not want to start this procedure however without consulting c but there was no fur ther opportunity to do so. at the hearing it becomes clear that c had not been brought to or formally been presented to the court. because of this procedural error the detention was lifted and c was put on the street. the lawyer who expressed his concern at this state of affairs was informed that the aliens police had invited his client to report the next day following the lifting of his detention. the chance that c had understood this was fairly remote since he did not understand dutch and presuma bly no interpreter had been used. this case raises some questions for instance why the police let the car driver go. it is alarm ing that an unaccompanied minor who does not speak any dutch should be in a police cell for a few days followed by aliens detention and finally put out on the street. the lawyer felt he was faced with a dilemma in this case. what is in the client s interests if the client is years old and indicates that he wants to return to what was probably a perilous situation possibly involving exploitation it is apparent from different cases that the child protection agency does not always re spond consistently to the possible exploitation of minors. the different responses may have to do with the fact that it is not always possible in practice to strike a proper balance be tween child protection law on the one hand and migration law on the other cardol . dutch child protection measures can be applied to foreign children in the netherlands irre spective of their residential status. the agency s policy in relation to undocumented minors is no different from their policy in relation to minors residing legally in the netherlands cardol . but according to cardol the agency has indicated that there may be some inconsistency in implementation if there is a clash between migration policy and policy on child protection. in his view in practice the rule seems to be that migration law takes prece dence over youth protection and also that those involved in youth protection are not always sufficiently familiar with migration law. anyone who might become involved with unac companied underage migrants must be familiar with the signs of various forms of thb and the appropriate protective measures. socio psychological condition one special group of potential victims of labour exploitation are those with socio psychological problems. some employers abuse people who are extremely unassertive or who have to cope with personality disorders. this form of vulnerability partly explains why bnrm also found cases relating to dutch nationals. limited social understanding which involves a certain degree of self protection can result in serious wrongs in relation to em ployment for example when combined with money worries and social isolation. what all of this shows is that the composition of the group of potential victims has been changed by the broadening of the scope of the criminalisation of thb. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . . characteristics of potential perpetrators because of the central questions and methods applied in the bnrm research into labour exploitation limited information was collected on the individuals responsible for serious abuse in employment situations most of the information that was collected was obtained from hsi and siod respondents. other criminal conduct respondents from the hsi and the siod indicate that the businesses where they find the most serious abuses and also the managers there were not particularly concerned with ob serving laws and regulations in general. one amf team leader gave the example of a com pany which apart from illegal employment in bad conditions was also suspected of violat ing environmental social security and tax laws. staff the research gives no insight into any link between the size of the staff of businesses and the occurrence of exploitation. serious abuses occur in small and informal businesses as well as in major enterprises. cultural relationships with victims it is known from various studies on people smuggling that the perpetrators of this crime of ten have the same ethnic background as the people they smuggle van der leun ver voorn . this also seems to apply to human traffickers and their victims of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. relatives and partners sometimes the relationship between perpetrator and victim is even closer. exploitation oc curs within relationships marriages and families often in combination with multiple de pendence abuse of an imbalance of power in the relationship and mental or physical vio lence. several of the bnrm case studies show that there is not always an adequate response to signs of exploitation in the family context even when the victims are minors. . points of attention and bottlenecks when dealing with exploitation outside the sex industry . . introduction an effective approach to thb for non sexual exploitation should cover prevention detec tion and investigation the prosecution of suspects and protection for victims. policy in this area coincides broadly with that in relation to thb for sexual exploitation. it does however involve some different cooperating agencies. exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry fighting exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry is still in the early stages. the first steps towards its prevention were taken in early by the ministry of social affairs and employment and the social partners in the context of the flanking policy for the free movement of workers from countries that had become eu member states in . refer ence is made to chapter for the issues of highlighting exploitation outside the sex industry which is now getting into its stride and the first investigations in this field. at the time when this chapter was being written there were no irrevocable court verdicts on this form of thb yet. there is not yet enough material to assess prosecution practice either but bnrm will be carefully following the case law on exploitation outside the sex industry. reference can be made to the lengthier experience in belgium the cgkr confirms that not every bel gian court yet views exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry as thb and that the courts sensitivity to this issue needs to be improved. the stv has registered the first pos sible victims of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. this means that the stv and other organisations involved in providing assistance to victims of thb have to deal with changed client profiles and new requests for help. . . points of attention and bottlenecks this section includes a number of points for attention and bottlenecks in relation to dealing with thb for exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. legislation and policy when the criminalisation of thb was extended the legislature failed to make it suffi ciently clear which abuses in relation to labour or services should be qualified as exploita tion within the meaning of thb. the lack of a clear definition of exploitation impedes the identification investigation and prosecution of non sexual exploitation. the extension of the scope of the offence demands even more than before a targeted cooperation among the various government departments to achieve an effective thb policy. prevention on the demand side there has as yet been little action on the government s own proposal to try in consulta tion with employer and employee organisations to reduce the levels of the demand that can result in exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. when this chapter was completed two verdicts at first instance had been handed down. these cases involved the illegal employment of bulgarians as hemp pickers and of chinese in a restaurant. in both cases the accused were exonerated at first instance on charges of thb. various initiatives were being prepared in the netherlands at the time when this report was being compiled to provide training on thb to judges and these initiatives will also deal with exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. in the additional measures to the nam. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur identifying and investigating possible thb situations the wider public is ignorant about exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry and the fact that this is punishable as thb which reduces the general alertness. there is also a lack of awareness of this criminalisation of labour exploitation among those who might encounter signs of it in their voluntary work such as trade union employees youth so cial workers lawyers and those support asylum seekers or undocumented migrants. a great deal of attention and capacity have been applied in recent years to combating ille gality. the aim of this policy is twofold on the one hand to deport undocumented mi grants and on the other hand to deal with those who exploit these people. dealing with il legality and combating thb are two separate policy fields but measures in one field may impact on the other. on paper it is recognised that there may be victims of thb among undocumented migrants but it is essential for this to be also taken into account in practice. there is after all a risk that victims of exploitation will simply be viewed as illegal work ers. a victim oriented approach to thb requires that in any campaign to combat illegality possible victims should be recognised as such and informed of their rights for example to make use of the b regulation. there are signs that the police do not always take action when undocumented migrants want to report a crime although the police are obliged to record reports. because of the part it has to play in combating illegal employment the hsi is not always in a position to protect illegal employees effectively against exploitative working conditions. terminating an illegal employment situation can be incompatible with gaining the trust of a possible victim of thb. the twofold duties of the hsi mean that undocumented mi grants will not be inclined to report abuses or accidents at the workplace to the hsi. workplace checks by the hsi are however an important potential source of information on exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. but checking on infringements of the aliens employment act will only contribute towards ending exploitative situations if signs of serious abuse are picked up and reported to the siod. if this does not happen it could even be the case that an employer might recover the fine for illegal employment from his illegal employees. risk sectors there is a link between the relatively high degree of illegal employment in certain sectors and the chance of serious abuses. ethnic entrepreneurship can provide a hidden circuit in which exploitation can go on rela tively unobserved. labour exploitation can occur partly in the netherlands and partly across the border. exploitation outside the sex industry is taking place in the informal sector as well includ ing domestic work. this sector is not readily accessible to either inspection and special investigation services or trade unions. au pairs are vulnerable to exploitation because of their multiple dependence on the host family and the fact that they work in a private environment. there is little understanding exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry of the employment situations of the most vulnerable au pairs namely those who do not or no longer comply with the conditions of the au pair permit. there is no supervision with regard to the actual working situations of the very vulnerable migrant domestic workers who are employed by foreign diplomats. deregulation of the employment market is part of the explanation for the existence of ex tremely poor working conditions in the industrialised nations ilo . the employ ment agency sector deregulated in is a significant risk sector for exploitation. yet the existence of serious abuses plays no great part in the political debate on self regula tion of the sector or how to deal with malafide labour subcontractors. groups at risk and victims the position of undocumented migrants in the dutch employment market appears to have deteriorated in recent years. illegal work seems to be going further underground leading to more work situations that can turn into exploitation. many undocumented migrants know too little about their rights as employees. a possible victim of exploita tion outside the sex industry will often have no idea that he has certain rights under the b regulation. it is also difficult in many cases to gain the trust of a possible victim cer tainly if he is residing in the netherlands illegally and or his trust in the authorities has been damaged in the past skriv nkov . the continued expansion of the eu and the end of the transitional provisions in relation to workers from new eu member states will not mark the end of illegal employment or exploitation. in a globalised world with increasing international competition inequality and mobility it seems more likely that the countries of origin of the vulnerable labour mi grants will continue to shift. migrants who come to the netherlands for family formation or reunification have free ac cess to the labour market. their residence permit carries the risk however of abuse of the dependence on relationships or family ties under migration law which sometimes lead to exploitation. the government acknowledges that minors are particularly vulnerable and that underage victims of thb deserve special attention. nevertheless the illegal status of a minor some times seems to be a hindrance to securing accommodation in a shelter legal assistance and if necessary a child protection order. the extension of the article on thb has introduced new categories of victims but it has so far not resulted in an expansion or differentiation of the reception and shelter facilities for victims. social workers and legal assistance providers who are in contact with the most vulnerable individuals in the employment market can highlight possible thb cases. one difficulty however is that the fear of undocumented migrants to be deported will often deter these professionals from reporting exploitative practices. this attitude is only likely to change if social workers and legal assistance providers can be sure that reporting labour exploita tion will be in the interests of their client. sometimes there are also other legal actions trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur that migrants can take against an employer without risking disclosure of their illegal resi dence. it is important for those who provide legal assistance to be aware of these possi bilities and not to advise against them unnecessarily. trafficking in human beings for the purpose of organ removal . introduction since the expansion of the definition of the offence on january trafficking in human beings thb can also be aimed at the removal of another person s organs. so far though there are virtually no indications that this type of thb takes place in the netherlands. nev ertheless the new thb provision prompted bnrm to look into this topic. bnrm opted for a broad survey because the demand for organs can lead to commercial organ trans plants i.e. the trade in organs as well as to thb with a view to organ removal. terminology used by bnrm organ component of the human body or the human foetus excluding blood and reproductive cells. organ transplant the entire process from preparation for the operation to transfer of an organ from one human to another including any interim conservation and storage of the organ. organ tourism travelling abroad in order to obtain an organ for transplant. trade in organs offering for sale and actually selling an organ buying an organ and also mediating between a purchaser and a seller with a view to profit including the actual transplant of a such an or gan. thb with a view to organ removal recruiting transporting or accommodating another person with the use of force and the purpose of removing that person s organ s . the bnrm investigation into the subject was twofold. firstly it included a study of the lit erature exploring the statutory framework for organ transplants in the netherlands the in ternational trade in organs the question whether dutch citizens are involved in this and the ethical debate on the various ways in which organs can be made available for transplant. the second element of the investigation involved interviewing transplant surgeons and trans plant coordinators and focussed on the question of whether there are any dutch kidney pa tients who want to have tried to or actually have succeeded in buying a kidney for trans plant either in the netherlands or abroad. the shortage of organs available for transplantation also leads to research into possible alternatives for human to human transplants such as xenotransplants and artificial organs. in line with the definition used in the explanatory memorandum to the organ donation act wet op de orgaandonatie wod . in legal terms the concept covers more than it does in its standard medical meaning. this definition follows the council of europe s additional protocol to the convention on human rights and biomedicine on transplantation of organs and tissues of human origin . apart from scientific literature informational booklets and legislation and regulations media reports and internet sites were studied in order to find more case oriented information including urban myths about the trade in organs. the bnrm investigation concentrated on kidneys as these are in shortest supply most of the literature is about trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the central issues in this chapter are the connections and distinctions between the trade in organs on the one hand and thb with a view to organ removal on the other hand. it also deals with legislation on organ donation and the debate about and of symptoms of the commercialization of organ donation. . state of affairs and developments virtually no research has been done on the involvement of dutch citizens in organ tourism trade in organs or thb with a view to organ removal. there are as yet very few indications of any trade in organs or thb with a view to organ removal in the netherlands. according to the national institute for health promotion and disease prevention nationaal instituut voor gezondheidsbevordering en ziektepreventie nigz the origins of every organ trans planted in the netherlands are known and the registration and control systems leave no room for a black market in organs. van der leun and vervoorn as well as the board of procurators general in the thb instruction aanwijzing mensenhandel also con clude that the practice of trade in organs appears to be non existent in the netherlands. at the same time it is quite conceivable that long waiting times for organs in the nether lands and the ease of public access to information on the trade in organs abroad may al ready have led dutch citizens to get involved in organ tourism or at least that this might happen in future. after all there is a significant shortage of available organs in the nether lands as in many other countries for the increasing numbers of patients awaiting a trans plant with the result that one in five of these patients dies before a transplant can take place van schravendijk . ijzermans who is a professor of transplant surgery indicated in that organ tourism can be anticipated if the number of organs from living donors does not increase. he referred to opportunities for buying organs in hungary and the former yugoslavia. two medical specialists reported in the media in january that some pa tients had arranged organ transplants in china. . . organ donation and trade in organs the donor registration system there is a passive donor registration system in the netherlands. this is also called a consent system as any organ removal after death requires explicit consent. there is no obligation kidney transplants and the greatest likelihood of thb with a view to organ removal would seem to centre around kidneys. akinbing l however suggests that some migrants smuggled from turkey to western europe have financed their trip by selling an organ. an average of four years for a donor kidney transplant. about people were waiting for an organ at the end of of whom more than were waiting for a kidney. people were awaiting tissue other than skin . organs from deceased donors and organs from living donors were transplanted in and tissue excluding skin was transplanted more than times www.transplantatiestichting.nl . post mortem non heart beating donation is allowed and sometimes heart beating donation. trafficking in human beings for the purpose of organ removal to register one s consent or objection and anyone who has not made his choice known is presumed not to be available as a donor. an alternative system is the active donor or non objection system. the principle here is that everyone is presumed to be a donor unless they have registered an objection. there has been a lot of political debate in recent years on the pros and cons of the dutch donor registration system. this has not resulted in any funda mental changes however. the organ donation act the statutory rules on the removal of organs from humans are set out in the organ dona tion act wet op de orgaandonatie wod . the most important conditions imposed by the wod are express prior consent from the donor and provision of the organ free of charge. this is an attempt according to the wod explanatory memorandum to protect the inviolability of the human body and the right to self determination both of which con tinue beyond the point of death to some extent as well as a fair distribution of available or gans. as far as living organ donation is concerned the donor must be in a position to give consent having been adequately informed for the removal of a specific organ for transplan tation articles and wod . the provision of organs after death also requires in principle the donor s consent or in the absence of any declaration of will consent from the deceased s nearest surviving relative s . consent for organ removal is void if it is given in order to obtain a payment for to donation which is higher than the costs directly resulting from the removal. one reason for this is that the legislator considers that a donor s free will is not guaranteed if there is a profit motive. there may also then be a danger of exploitation wod explanatory memorandum . nor may there be any profit motive for the organ centre or organ banks mediating in obtaining typing transporting and allocating organs or involved in transporting storing processing transferring or implanting bodily materials. the wod contains a penal provision article specifying that whoever intentionally re moves an organ during life or after death without consent in terms of the wod will be li more than million people have had their preference on donation registered in the netherlands. nearly half of these have permitted unrestricted donation. about have allowed donation with restrictions about have left the decision to their surviving relatives or a specific individual and more than have withheld consent www.donorregister.nl . there are additional conditions for donation by a minor. only those costs which are a direct result of the donation including lost income can be compensated. living donation generally occurs with a sick family member or partner. if this is impossible due to incompatibility of blood groups between donor and recipient it is sometimes possible to undertake cross over transplants the exchange of donor organs between two or more donor recipient pairs den hartogh . this is also an argument against the commercialization of organ donation for the world medical association payment for organs and tissues for donation and transplantation should be prohibited. a financial incentive compromises the voluntariness of the choice and the altruistic basis for organ and tissue donation. furthermore access to needed medical treatment based on ability to pay is inconsistent with the principles of justice. http www.wma.net e policy wma.htm . the netherlands transplantation foundation is the only organ centre in the netherlands. it is affiliated to the international donation programmes of eurotransplant and bio implant services. there are six organ banks in the netherlands. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur able to a term of imprisonment not exceeding one year and a fourth category fine. the re moval of organs from a living person without permission is in certain circumstances also covered by the thb provision article f dutch criminal code which provides for a far more serious sentence i.e. a maximum of six years imprisonment and a fifth category fine. the penal provision in the wod also covers those mediating between donors and recipi ents if the payment involved is higher than the costs incurred and also those openly offering or asking such a payment for an organ. trade in organs the trade in organs includes offer an organ for sale or selling or purchasing an organ and mediating between the seller and purchaser of an organ with a view to obtain profit. it will often involve desperate patients whose life or quality of life is seriously threatened on the one hand and people who are prepared to sell a part of their body for instance because of extreme poverty or a lack of any alternative means to generate an income. third parties are always involved in this trade doctors but often brokers as well. organ trade is not permitted in the netherlands regardless of voluntariness on the part of the seller and purchaser. there is an ongoing debate on the desirability of market forces in this field. the medical ethical debate on trade in organs a range of moral standpoints are adopted in the debate on commercial organ transplants. scheper hughes a professor of anthropology and chairman of organs watch a research project into human rights and organ transplants calls trade in organs neo cannibalism . she argues that the com mercialisation of the human body makes exploitation inevitable and focuses on grotesque abuses in this market sector . del monico is also a fervent opponent of allowing paid organ transplants. the poor will remain poor but lose their health and organs in the process of government authorized exploitation of the poor ac cording to him . den hartogh and hilhorst offer different views on the issue of allowing trade or exchange of organs. den hartogh a professor of ethics does not regard commercialism as objectionable per se and criti cises a number of objections made about the concept. one objection to market allocation is that access may come to depend on the depth of one s pocket rather than on purely medical factors but den har togh does not rule out the possibility of the netherlands transplantation foundation buying in some of the organs that are needed to redistribute them on medical grounds. den hartogh refutes on theoretical grounds the arguments that poor people will be forced into doing things that are harmful to them and that if we permit a market we cannot protest against developing countries doing the same where the poor will certainly be exploited . he feels that the key objection to commercialisation is that organs because of their symbolic value are not the kind of thing for which a market should be allowed to develop. but where one sets the boundary around what can be bought for money is a matter partly of convention and partly of personal ethics den hartogh . the medical ethicist hilhorst describes it as incomprehensible unnecessary and unacceptable that the trade in organs is banned in the netherlands while the government is failing to resolve the if the offence results in serious physical injury or death the maximum penalties are twelve and years imprisonment respectively art. f and dutch criminal code . trafficking in human beings for the purpose of organ removal shortage of organs. if the government cannot meet this need he argues then it should not frustrate the alternative offered by trade in organs. however the voluntary sale of organs does not alter the fact that trade in organs can in practice imply health risks for the sellers certainly if they are affected by poverty. there can for instance be serious medical and economic consequences to organ removal without proper aftercare. awareness of the risks may influence society s acceptance of trade in organs. apart from the dangers inherent for organ sellers in a world with major socio economic inequality one objection against commercialisation is that it undermines a fair distribution of the available organs. thus the dutch legislator considers that this costly and scarce form of healthcare should not be re served to those who are well to do wod explanatory memorandum . the medical specialists friedman and friedman on the other hand claim that is exactly what is already happening on the black market for organs which has come into being because of the shortage of donors. they argue for the regulation of organ donation in america through a national institute and legalisation on pay ment of a market price for a kidney. organ donation and trade in organs abroad the removal and allocation of organs is regulated in most western countries as in the neth erlands in such a way that they may only be donated and transplanted voluntarily and free of charge whether during life or on death. according to the nigz this means that there is no trade in organs in western europe. european countries do have differing donor registration systems and different relative numbers of transplant operations being undertaken. countries in other parts of the world also have legislation on organ donation but in certain countries it apparently is being circumvented. possible explanations for this include pov erty and a lack of prospects among potential donors inadequate control within the medical world and corruption. rothman and rothman suggest for example that illegal trade in organs in thailand developed due to the lack of a national organ register and a health care inspectorate that only acts upon complaints. it is worth mentioning here the media reports from october that seven funeral under takers in new york state allegedly removed and sold bones and organs from hundreds of corpses without consent. goyal et al. show that the financial situation of indians who had sold a kidney had not improved or had even deteriorated. pearson refers to the research done by zargooshi reaching the same conclusion about iranians who had sold a kidney. commercialisation of organ transplants can take various forms for instance post mortem donation in exchange for payment of burial costs to the surviving relatives h yry referring to rothman . there is no direct relationship between donor registration systems and the number of donations. other factors also determine the number of possible transplants. one such factor is the number of road traffic fatalities which is relatively low in the netherlands coppen . in practice the consent of surviving relatives also appears to be a determining factor in the netherlands irrespective of the deceased s donor registration status no transplant will take place without their consent. according to pearson research by organ watch shows that there is an illegal trade in organs in cuba brazil argentina india iran israel palestine moldavia romania the philippines russia turkey the usa and south africa. h yry mentions some of these countries and also thailand egypt iraq peru and estonia. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur according to pearson trade in organs is only formally permitted in iran and the phil ippines. rothman and rothman outline a picture of doctors politicians and scien tists in the philippines regarding this as quite acceptable that in practice this means that poor slum dwellers in particular sell their kidneys to wealthy kidney patients. it is known that or gans from executed prisoners have been used for transplants in china also for foreign re cipients h yry referring to guttmann . the chinese authorities are apparently also responsible for organ removal from executed prisoners without their consent which is required by law amnesty international bellagio task force . in some cases those sentenced to death and their relatives were not consulted while in other cases the sur viving relatives received a monetary payment human rights watch . perhaps be cause of these practices foreign visitors to china can arrange for a purchased kidney to be transplanted within a few weeks. a look at the internet if you send your personal data to this center by e mail of fax and accept the necessary body examina tion in shanyang china in order to assure a suitable donor it may take only one month to receive a liver transplantation the maximum waiting time being two months. as for the kidney transplantation it may take only one week to find a suitable donor the maximum waiting time being one month. http en.zoukiishoku.com list volunteer.htm are you sick of waiting for an organ transplant for those awaited kidney patients we understand live is not mean to be sick all the time if you or your loved ones has end stage renal failure or liver or heart failure time is precious. the longer you wait the worth your health will deteriorate. with the in creasing gap between donor and patient numbers for some waiting is no longer an option. as one of the prominent organ transplant coordinator in china we can provide you the highest standards of service with minimal risk. our transplantation programs include kidney pancreas liver heart and lung. we then arrange consultation with your surgeon and physician to discuses your most optimal surgery plan. until such point you are free of charge. when you do give us the go ahead a small nonre fundable booking fee of along with your application form and your blood type hla type de tail have to be logged. we will search our transplant hospital network for the highest blood type and hla tissue type match and inform you the first available surgery date it could be from a couple of weeks to a few months depending on availability of your match. http www.newlifetransplant.com do the organs come from a alive or dead donors the donor organs come from people that are exe cuted in china. what are the costs and what does that include kidney transplant cost for non chi nese citizens us us under years old . please note that for kidney transplant if your blood type is o then an additional charge of us needs to be added. liver transplant cost for non chinese citizens us us under years old . the above price covers the new organs priority on the waiting list the transplant surgery hospital stay interpreter e.t.c. it does according to persistent but unverifiable reports many of the transplanted organs in china are taken from the supporters of falun gong. see matas kilgour and http investigation.go.saveinter.net kilgour matas organ harvesting rpt july eng.pdf. these sites were most recently consulted on february . language errors on the sites were not corrected. trafficking in human beings for the purpose of organ removal not cover your travel costs hotel stay transportation. note if the patient s function of the heart and lungs is poor the patient has diabetes and or high blood preasure and if the patient s condition is bad an additional charge might be added. http www.bek transplant.com the chinese government amended the legislation on organ transplants in by means of a temporary regulation followed by new legislation in april . the extent to which various countries are involved in international organ trade as a country of origin for either organ suppliers or organ tourists is determined not only by legislation other government involvement and discrepancies in levels of welfare but also by religious or other culturally determined concepts concerning the human body. dutch patients who travel abroad to have an organ transplant are not in principle guilty of any criminal offence under dutch criminal law. this is different if the situation involves thb with a view to organ removal. . . thb with a view to organ removal article f dutch criminal code prohibits the recruitment transportation or accom modating of another person with the purpose of removing that person s organ s when force which can take on the form of for instance deception is used. sub paragraphs and of paragraph also describe transactions aimed at organ removal or profiting from organ removal. the palermo protocol and the eu framework decision on which article f dutch criminal code is based differ on the point of organ removal. whereas the pro tocol article classifies it as a form of exploitation it is not included in the framework de cision. this is why the dutch legislator included organ removal in addition to exploitation in the thb provision explanatory memorandum . more fundamental is the distinction between trade in organs on the one hand and thb with a view to organ removal on the other. the essence of trade in organs is the profit motive and the rationale of the penal provision in the wod is to counteract commercial transplant ac tivities. one reason for this is that such activities can lead to the involuntary removal of or gans. however trade in organs is not by definition involuntary whereas the use of coercion is a necessary element to fulfil the statutory description of thb at least vis vis adults. arti cle f dutch criminal code criminalizes the intended violation of another person s physical integrity by way of coerced organ removal. or to put it another way trade in organs presumes that there is an organ available for bar ter. this organ may be obtained in one of two ways either voluntarily whether free of the legislation came into effect on may information from the chinese embassy in the netherlands dated april . profit motive is not an essential element of thb with a view to organ removal. it is however likely that most criminals who are guilty of the offence will be acting from profit motives. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur charge or for payment or involuntarily i.e. as a result of thb. trade in organs is not there fore the same thing as thb with a view to organ removal. inherent only to the latter is the use of coercion in the transportation or accommodation of another person for the purpose of organ removal. article f dutch criminal code applies to dutch nationals abroad for example when they recruit someone there with deception in order to remove his organs provided that the ac tivities also constitute a criminal offence in the country where they are committed. this re quirement of double criminality does not apply if a dutch national is guilty of thb involv ing a minor in a foreign country including wilfully profiting from the removal of organs from a child. minors any person who induces a minor also without the use of force to make his organs avail able for remuneration will be guilty of thb article f dutch criminal code . ar ticle f also describes certain activities relating to non commercial voluntary organ removal from children. according to the letter of this provision it seems that innocent forms of involvement in organ donation by a child are also criminalized as thb. however according to the spirit of the law this is certainly not the case when the child involved is in a position to make a reasonable assessment of his interests has granted consent and fulfilled all other conditions for living organ donation prescribed by the wod. . exploratory research among medical practitioners it is relevant to know whether commercial transplants are taking place to benefit dutch pa tients or facilitated by dutch nationals before investigating whether this might involve thb with a view to organ removal. for this reason in depth interviews were conducted with internist nephrologists kidney specialists transplant coordinators and a transplant surgeon working at the academic transplant centres. a doctor at the anwb emergency cen tre and two kidney patients were also interviewed. it appears from the interviews that there is little or no trade in organs in the netherlands. nonetheless many of the interviewees felt that greater watchfulness in this respect is neces sary as the number of living donations is on the increase. the relationship or emotional bond between the donor and recipient is verified by the nephrologist the social worker and the transplant coordinator and if necessary also by a general practitioner psychologist or psychiatrist. at the same time the interviews show that a donation can proceed if the donor the thb provision also serves to cover implementation of the position determined under the optional protocol on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography annexed to the convention on the rights of the child. these obligations include penalising the offer supply or acceptance of a child for the transfer of organs with a view to profit. the coordinators are responsible for the care of organ donors and their relatives before during and after the donation. trafficking in human beings for the purpose of organ removal and the recipient confirm that the donation is completely altruistic and there are no indica tions of coercion financial consideration or of course any medical obstacles. the fact that the relationship and motives of the donor and recipient are not always thoroughly scruti nized means that there is a risk of donation with a view to profit or as a result of force or manipulation. doctors and transplant coordinators seem to be more on the alert for signs of pressure or manipulation than a possible profit motive. in some cases a donor indicated that he felt pressurised into donating a kidney to a relative. some doctors also mentioned cases where they suspected that the donor was receiving some financial remuneration. in a few of these cases the donation procedure was cancelled for these reasons. at every one of the academic hospitals it occurs fairly regularly that foreign relatives of kid ney patients mostly of foreign heritage come to the netherlands in order to donate a kid ney. this is a time consuming procedure according to the interviewees. all the nephrologists interviewed know or have heard of patients who have undergone a kidney transplant abroad not through eurotransplant . these operations took place in the usa india pakistan iran iraq china and possible also colombia singapore and thailand. the letters or medical files patients bring with them after receiving a transplant abroad form one source of information about organ tourism. on a limited number of cases interviewees provided some more information but never very detailed. possible explanations for this are that the patients involved do not tell their nephrologists much about the transplant or that the doctors themselves are reluctant to discuss the subject in detail . it may also be that some doctors had difficulty remembering the cases because they dated back several years. only rarely the nephrologists we interviewed pick up on signs that a patient has bought a kidney abroad. since patients will generally be reluctant to talk about this with their special ists it is possible that the involvement in the organ trade remains unnoticed to some extent. all the doctors interviewed stated that they had never cooperated with any patients who wanted to undergo a commercial transplant abroad with the exception of one doctor who assisted a patient of iranian origins with his preparations for a commercial transplant in the country of his birth where this is permitted. in the context of this research bnrm spoke to a male kidney patient of chinese origins who had travelled to china in in order to receive a kidney transplant there. the patient received help for this from his relatives in china. the total amount paid for the kidney and the transplant was between and . apart from the long waiting period in the netherlands the ease of receiving health care in his own language was another reason for this patient to have a paid kidney transplant in china. he was helped out in his preparations for the transplant by his dialysis doctor in the netherlands with whom he also kept in con tact during his stay in china. for a description of the iranian model see fazel . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . points of attention and bottlenecks there are regular reports in the media about the drawbacks of trade in organs including the looting of organs in other parts of the world. while some may be based on serious in vestigative journalism it is difficult to verify these news items. there is no reliable information on dutch patients who arrange for an organ transplant abroad. this makes it difficult to assess the risk of dutch nationals being involved on the demand side in coerced organ removal in other countries. long waiting periods for transplants international discrepancies in legislation and access to information about transplant opportunities abroad can form a breeding ground for or gan tourism from the netherlands. medical specialists indicate that the increasing numbers of organ donations by living do nors implies that a greater watchfulness on the part of transplant centres for donations which are possibly not entirely voluntary or made for a financial consideration is necessary. recommendations once again great efforts have been applied and progress has been made in the fight against thb since the appearance of the previous report. the previous chapters show however that there are still a number of shortcomings. this chapter contains recommendations de signed to address and improve these matters. they are formulated concisely and should be understood in the context of the previous chapters as well as the recommendations made in previous reports. the recommendations are grouped thematically and are not arranged in order of priority. legislation . the netherlands must ratify the council of europe convention on action against traf ficking in human beings as quickly as possible. the convention states amongst other mat ters that assistance to a victim may not be made conditional on that victim s willingness to act as a witness in the criminal legal process. this is in line with previous recommendations by the nrm nrm recommendation to the effect that reception and assistance should not be confined to victims who cooperate in investigation and prosecution or who are con sidering doing so. speedy ratification is also important in connection with the establishment of greta the independent group of experts which is to monitor the implementation of the convention. . it is recommended that the legislator develops a national framework for prostitution pol icy based on the principle that every municipality must set rules in relation to all establish ments where commercial sexual transactions are undertaken or where commercial facilities are provided for such transactions to be undertaken with or for a third party. research is re quired into the most appropriate format of legislation for this purpose. . since the employment agency sector is a risk sector for exploitation an enquiry should be made as to whether the british gangmaster licensing act in terms of which there is obliga tory licensing in the united kingdom for employment brokers in agriculture and the fishing industry is having any impact on the battle against exploitative practices in the employment agency sector and whether similar legislation should also be introduced in the netherlands. regulations b and continued residence . the b regulation for possible victims of trafficking should always be offered as soon as there is a slight indication of thb. . in light of the judgment by the council of state to the effect that the suspected victimhood of a foreign national does not preclude placing that individual into aliens detention the trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur regulations in this matter should be amended. after all the intention behind the reflection period under the b regulation is that a possible victim should be allowed to consider in peace whether or not to report the criminal offence and this is not compatible with deten tion. . it is recommended to include in the b regulation a provision to the effect that a state ment by a victim of thb should be regarded as the equivalent of a report of the criminal of fence for the purposes of applying the regulation. . the new rules on continued residence following expiry of the b regulation contained in chapter b of the aliens act implementation guidelines should apply not only to vic tims who have reported the criminal offence but also to victims who have cooperated as witnesses in the investigation and prosecution processes. this follows on from the previous recommendation. . the grounds for continued residence contained in chapter b of the aliens act im plementation guidelines that the victim has reported the offence for the purpose of a criminal case which has led to a conviction should not be confined to criminal cases that result in a conviction for thb. there should also be a presumption in law that repatriation involves risks if the victim reports the offence of thb for a criminal case where thb is in cluded in the charges and the accused is convicted for another offence related to the thb but not for thb as such. . the grounds for continued residence under chapter b of the aliens act implementa tion guidelines must be adjusted so as to express more clearly that after three years in the b regulation the length of time the victim has resided in the netherlands constitutes the humanitarian grounds for approving an application for continued residence. . regarding applications for continued residence not covered by the new regulations the burden of proof should be placed less on the shoulders of the victim. this implies a more far reaching duty of investigation for the government with a view to preparing a thorough risk assessment. central government policy . the fight against thb demands an inter departmental approach with each of the minis tries accepting its responsibility. an active contribution on the part of the ministry of social affairs and employment is particularly important when it comes to thb with a view to ex ploitation outside the sex industry. . the criteria for employment and self employment in the sex industry have to be estab lished as soon as possible and then publicised widely. recommendations . in policymaking regarding illegal migration labour migration and working conditions the impact of any measures on thb with the intention of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry should always be taken into account. . the government should consider the possibility for undocumented migrants to report a criminal offence to the police or report abuses in the workplace to the health and safety in spectorate without running the risk of aliens detention and expulsion. law enforcement in the prostitution sector . all of the parties involved in the administrative enforcement in the sex industry must ac cept their responsibilities and must undertake such enforcement jointly. this requires more intensive checks by the police on the illegal prostitution sector and a consistent and visible repressive approach to law enforcement within the licensed circuit by the municipalities. the capacity required for this needs to be made available. this is the only way to achieve a prostitution sector as crime free as possible. it is also recommended that information on ef forts in this area and the results achieved should be made available centrally. . it is recommended that every municipality should impose a licensing requirement on es cort businesses and make it a condition of granting a licence in the general municipal ordi nance that escort businesses must have a fixed address with a fixed telephone number where they keep their day to day records including staffing records. in this context see also recommendation . . research should be undertaken into how to maintain effective supervision over sex busi nesses where paid and unpaid sex is taking place such as couples clubs. a set of instruments should be developed for this purpose. experience from the supervision of escorts show that supervision is possible even for parts of the sex industry that are hard to check up on. . it is important to adequately investigate whether prostitutes working legally are victims of thb. for instance because prostitutes from previously significant countries of origin for victims of thb have apparently found a way to work in the sex industry legally for in stance via marriages of convenience or self employment. . operators of sex businesses licensed or otherwise who employ victims of thb must be tackled and dealt with in every way possible. this might involve prosecuting them for em ployer s fraud or tax fraud in addition to thb for example. this requires the collaboration of all the chain partners. prevention . little is known about the impact of prevention and support projects on the victims of loverboys or thb. it is recommended that research should be undertaken in this area to al low for a more evidence based approach. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . more should be done to prevent unaccompanied underage asylum seekers from falling victim to thb. this must involve clearer arrangements in a new or adjusted protocol for missing amas or elsewhere on the responsibilities of the various chain partners in prevent ing amas from leaving for unknown destinations as well as in finding them as quickly as possible if they do disappear. these responsibilities then have to be acted on soon after the ama arrives or immediately after he or she goes missing. the pilot on secure shelter may make a contribution here. . the government must accept its responsibility in relation to former amas who have just reached the age of adulthood and who are vulnerable to exploitation by keeping this group under supervision and offering them support. . dealing with perpetrators both preventatively and repressively through local pro jects dealing with the loverboy problem is still in its infancy and requires further develop ment input. . the fight against thb with a view of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry should incorporate involving potential new partners more actively including employers and their organisations sectoral organisations and trade unions in the known risk sectors. the government must provide them with information on thb and enter into a dialogue with them on their potential role in preventing and detecting thb. . since people are more vulnerable to exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry if they are unaware of their rights more needs to be done to inform those who have a mar ginal position on the labour market and in society about their basic labour rights. the gov ernment has an important part to play here. . it is recommended that the ministry of foreign affairs should adopt a more proactive policy in relation to the employment and working conditions foreign diplomats in the neth erlands impose on their migrant domestic workers. these employees should be informed of their rights including labour rights and should have the opportunity for reporting any abuses in their employment situation to the ministry which should then refer them if neces sary. . making recommendations on how to encourage organ donation is outside the scope of this report. however a general recommendation is made to encourage organ donation so as to reduce the risk of coerced organ removal as well as other irresponsible methods of meet ing the demand for organs. . as a number of doctors also indicated with regard to living organ donations there needs to be greater alertness in relation to the possibilities of involuntary donations and financial considerations. recommendations public awareness and identifying possible thb . public awareness should be extended as regards all forms of thb. there are various ways to do this from broad publicity campaigns to the targeted provision of information. it is recommended in this context that all employees of those institutions which might encoun ter thb should be given enough information to be able to recognise indications of thb and to be alert in this respect. attention should also be given here to the rights of possible vic tims and the initial assistance provided to them as well as the reporting of any indications of thb. . minors deserve extra attention as a group at risk of exploitation particularly those amongst them who are especially vulnerable such as those residing in the netherlands ille gally and those with minor psychological handicaps. it is recommended that organisations working with vulnerable children should be involved in identifying and assisting underage victims including helping them to report the criminal offence. it is also recommended that standard procedures should be developed and disseminated for the protection of children who have no residence permit guided by the treaty on the rights of the child. . undocumented migrants form a group at risk of exploitation. the training of officials in volved in dealing with illegal residence and fraud in the employment market should system atically deal with all forms of thb in order to improve their attentiveness of the signs of ex ploitation. progress has been made in relation to identifying and supporting possible victims of thb in aliens detention. it is important to maintain this attentiveness and not to lose sight of the possibility of male victims of thb in aliens detention. . it appears that certain foreign nationals who reside in the netherlands legally such as asylum seekers migrants with a dependent permit to reside with a partner and au pairs are vulnerable to exploitation. it should be investigated how the government can inform these individuals of their legal position and how they can be given an opportunity to ask questions or report any employment abuses. in this context see also recommendation . . as regards exploitation in the sex industry clients operators social workers neighbours passers by and others who are on the spot whether professionally or otherwise all have an ongoing and important responsibility in identifying thb. potential clients must be made aware of their responsibility to only purchase sexual services in the regulated sector and even then to remain observant. after all in this sector as well abuses cannot be ruled out by administrative checks alone. the public information campaign appearances are de ceptive which has yielded results should be continued in an adjusted format. in this context see also recommendation . . raising awareness of employers is important in connection with exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. this can be done by providing information to employers in the sectors where many migrants provide manual labour profit margins are small and staffing trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur costs are a significant element of production costs. private individuals employing someone for domestic work should also be informed about the minimum standards under employ ment law and about thb with a view to labour exploitation. assistance for victims . it should be investigated to what extent the problems of finding suitable accommoda tion in shelters or reception facilities for victims of thb could be reduced by measures such as a central intake and a category oriented initial reception. . the facilities for victims of thb require expansion and adjustment because of the growth in numbers and changes in the target group. a comparison with belgium where specialised centres are used for the reception of male and female victims of sexual exploita tion and other forms of exploitation could be instructive in light of the shift in the numerical proportions of male and female victims. . attempts must continue to be made to create appropriate and effective alternatives to simply locking underage girls up if they have been or are in danger of being introduced to prostitution. . it is important that sound legal support for victims of thb is safeguarded in all relevant areas of the law migration law criminal law and possibly also labour law. . victims should be informed at the earliest possible stage of the possibility of obtaining legal aid. for victims residing in the netherlands illegally this should be done at the same moment they should be offered the period for reflection under the b regulation. . more should be done to ensure that victims can recover their tangible and intangible losses by way of compensation. investigation . police capacity for the investigation of thb must be extended. police forces should al ways and without delay investigate indications of thb. an investigation should be initiated for every person suspected of thb who comes to the attention of the police whether or not a victim has reported the criminal offence for example by collecting and aggregating infor mation about the suspects . . greater attention needs to be paid in the battle against thb to facilitators such as docu ment forgers financial and legal advisers malafide employment agencies and labour bro kers. . detecting victims of thb is not easy certainly if they do no want to be recognised as such. however police officers also from the perspective of their supervising role in the recommendations prostitution sector have indicated that if they invest time in possible victims build a bond of trust with them and provide sound information some of them are prepared to come forward and even report the criminal offences after all. it is important for all divisions of the police force including the aliens police to do this and to thereby give attention to proper support adequate accommodation and the provision of accurate information. the same considerations apply outside the sex industry. individuals who are arrested in connection with working illegally must always be interviewed with attention being paid to any indica tions of thb. the manuals used by the special investigation agencies for their operations against illegal residence and labour market fraud should always refer to the possible pres ence of trafficking victims so that these can be recognised at an early stage and informed about their rights. . it is crucial that those police officers who in practice are likely to be the first point of contact for possible victims of thb who wish to report the offence are also aware of the fact that reports regarding thb must always be recorded. . the police must immediately inform the public prosecution service of any report of thb. . while human dignity is always at issue in cases of thb practical experience in investiga tion and prosecution has shown that the strict ban on tolerating the continuation of thb during investigations requires differentiation for each specific case. the police and the pub lic prosecution service look for ways of achieving this differentiation in practice without any rules to guide them. the ban on tolerating thb also sometimes obstructs an adequate fi nancial investigation. therefore the recommendation for a critical examination of how the policy regarding this ban is being applied in practice is repeated here. . financial investigation should form part of every thb case from the start aimed at both the confiscation of illegally obtained profits and the provision of evidence. financial investi gation can also prove useful in tracing large scale foreign criminal thb organisations fa cilitators and contacts in the legitimate business world. . which method of calculating the amount of illegally obtained profits either on a trans actional basis or by cash position asset comparison will provide the best chance of confisca tion should be considered carefully on a case by case basis. . cash flows destined for foreign countries should be followed where possible. the bnrm research has also shown the possibilities for good cooperation with foreign partners and acquiring useful information. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur prosecution . the fight against thb as a policy priority within the public prosecution service must be made concrete and realised in practice. . it must be ensured that the public prosecution service policy proposals such as invest ing in investigation and prosecution of all of the partners in crime financial investigations confiscation and international cooperation do not end up being pressurized by perform ance contracts affecting the police and the public prosecution service. . some of the public prosecution service policy proposals are expected to result in larger numbers of investigations and prosecutions for thb. this must be taken into account as re gards capacity within the investigative bodies the public prosecution service and the judiciary. . those public prosecutors holding thb portfolios should be involved to a greater ex tent in the investigation and prosecution of individual thb cases. . if asked to do so the public prosecution service must always keep victims informed about the progress of their cases. . it is recommended that relevant official reports and background information on the na ture and gravity of the offence should be included in a thb case dossier for the court s in formation. sentencing . greater attention should be paid to developing knowledge and expertise in the field of thb among the judiciary. . consideration should be given to whether thb should become a specialism for the judi ciary. international cooperation . it is recommended that the dutch government persists in its efforts to ensure that thb remains on the agenda at the european level where the work in relation to thb should more often build on what has already been achieved in this field. . in order to ensure a greater impact from the many international conferences on thb it is recommended that the meetings should as far as possible result in concrete agreements which should then be implemented. . in order to prevent thb to promote joint action on investigation and prosecution and possibly repatriation of victims in a responsible manner it is important for a range of or ganisations to seek or continue an active coordinated cooperation in these areas with the recommendations prevalent countries of origin for victims bulgaria nigeria and romania as well as remain ing alert for countries of origin from which the number of victims appears to be increasing. registration and scientific research . enquiries must be made as to how to make the registration of clients at the stv less am biguous and the records more complete. every possible measure for improving the situation should be taken adjustments to the registration process and possibly more manpower . . every institution that does or might have to deal with victims and indications of thb must be encouraged to report the circumstances to the appropriate body. the appropriate body is the stv as regards support and victim registration. . as far as registration of juvenile prostitution is concerned it is of crucial importance to distinguish between those who might be and those who actually are working in prostitution between minors and young adults and between cases that do and do not involve a third party who is inducing or deriving a profit from the activities as well as recording per individual as much as possible. . research is required into how to distinguish between sexual exploitation and other forms of exploitation in the databases containing information on thb and the fight against it such as public prosecution service data and records from the immigration and naturali sation service for b applications. . it is recommended that a study should be made of verdicts in thb confiscation cases to find out why claims are awarded or not which factors are at play and the nature of any bot tlenecks. the results should then form the basis for finding solutions designed to improve confiscation in thb cases. . it is recommended that research should be carried out into cases of victims who for the benefit of those who are exploiting them take out loans or who get into debt in some other way. many of the recommendations from the previous reports of the nrm have found their way into the national action plan on trafficking in human beings nam and the additional measures to the nam. it would seem likely that the above recommendations will lead to new additions to the nam. however it will be clear to the reader that a significant proportion of the recommendations deal with putting into practice what has already been set down in black and white concerning the fight against thb. a high level thb taskforce on which all of the chain partners are represented could play an important stimulating and facilitating role for this purpose. the final recommendation is therefore the creation of such a task force. summary . introduction the entry into force of the new criminal code provision relating to trafficking in human beings thb was an important recent development which brought exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry within the scope of the criminal provisions as well as certain ac tivities aimed at organ removal. three topics were subjected to further research for this re port financial investigations exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and thb for organ removal purposes. it is generally recognised that knowledge about thb is of great importance in enabling us to deal with the phenomenon in an adequate manner but also that it is difficult to collect reli able information. another significant question is the type of research that is required. there is a great need for numbers and a better understanding of them. there has not however up to the present time been a great deal of success in estimating the populations of the victims of thb. this is regrettable but to put matters in context although knowing the numbers may well say something about the scale of the measures needed to be able to deal with thb this would not clarify what has to be done. for this we also need more in the way of quali tative information. the quantitative information in this report relates to the period up to and including while the qualitative information also covers . . legislation and regulations . . human trafficking in the dutch criminal code the new thb provision article f dutch criminal code entered into force on january . the new article is included under the title offences against personal freedom . the new provision is partly based on a range of international agreements and signifies a distinct expansion of the conduct that is criminalised as thb in addition to sexual exploitation other forms of exploitation in the area of employment and services and the forced removal of organs are also criminalised as is wilfully profiting from this type of exploitation and forcing or inducing to provide with the proceeds from sex work or organ removal. sentences for aggravated thb have been increased. the penalty for thb without aggravat ing circumstances remained at a maximum of six years. when compared with crimes of a comparable nature and gravity this sentence could be described as light. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur article f dutch criminal code is a very extensive and complex article. in order to inter pret it one requires not only the explanatory memorandum but also the underlying inter national legislation which classifies thb as a serious form of organised crime and a viola tion of human rights. . . b regulation the b regulation has undergone a number of amendments since the new thb provision came into effect. the scheme now also applies to victims and witness complainants of ex ploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. a new facility was also introduced for vic tims and witness complainants enabling them to start work from the point when they re ceive a b residence permit. it also became possible for underage children of victims and witness complainants to obtain a residence permit for the same duration as that of the prin cipal applicant. the reflection period was extended to victims of all forms of exploitation. the criteria for continued residence after expiry of the b regulation were also amended. if information on thb provided by a victim has ultimately resulted in conviction of the sus pect in relation to that thb the minister will henceforth assume that this intrinsically im plies in law that returning the victim to his or her country of origin would involve risks. if the prosecution does not lead to a conviction but three years have passed between the grant ing of the b residence permit and the judgment becoming irrevocable then the most sig nificant humanitarian factor to be considered by the minister will be the length of the vic tim s residence. applications for continued residence that are not subject to these criteria will be dealt with in accordance with the former policy. the moment at which the b is offered remains an obstinate bottleneck. the police ought to inform the foreign national about the possibility of reporting the offence of thb as well as about the b regulation as soon as there is the slightest indication of thb but this does not always happen in practice. and while the purpose behind the period for reflection is that a possible victim should be able to consider whether or not to report the crime in complete peace victims do end up in aliens detention during the reflection period. a large number of organizations who are partners in the chain exchange information on bottlenecks in the implementation of the b regulation on a regular basis in the stv plat form. . . other primary and subordinate legislation the report also contains information on the state of affairs in relation to other relevant pri mary and subordinate legislation. attention is devoted amongst other matters to the aliens employment act wet arbeid vreemdelingen act on prevention of marriages of conven ience wet voorkoming schijnhuwelijken act on review of maximum penalties wet heri jking strafmaxima act on strengthening the position of victims in criminal proceedings wet versterking positie slachtoffers in het strafproces bill on secure juvenile care wets summary voorstel gesloten jeugdzorg and the act on minimum wage and minimum holiday al lowance wet minimumloon en minimumvakantietoeslag . . . international developments once again a number of agreements and regulations have been drawn up among interna tional organisations such as the un eu council of europe and osce in an attempt to counter thb. the following sections deal with the most relevant of these to policy in the netherlands. eu communication on fighting trafficking in human beings and eu action plan in october the european commission produced the communication on fighting traf ficking in human beings an integrated approach and proposals for an action plan. the commu nication covers a number of actions to be undertaken by the eu and or the member states. the underlying principle is that thb can only be challenged with an integrated approach based on respect for human rights and in viewing thb as a worldwide problem. in december the council produced the eu plan on best practices standards and pro cedures for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings hereafter the thb ac tion plan . the action plan consists of an overview of actions in the area of coordinating eu efforts mapping the problem prevention repressing demand investigation and prosecu tion protection of and assistance for victims repatriation and reintegration and external re lations. its goal is to increase the involvement of the eu and its member states in prevention of and challenge to all forms of thb as well to increase the attention for the protection as sistance and rehabilitation of victims. the council of europe convention on action against trafficking in human beings the council of europe convention on action against trafficking in human beings which opened for signature in may applies to all forms of thb either national or cross border and whether or not associated with organised crime. the human rights approach is an important angle of attack for the convention with the aim of preventing and countering thb protecting the rights of victims arranging for effective investigation and prosecution and finally promoting international collaboration to challenge thb. the convention con tains obligations which go further than other international instruments in this area and it provides for the setting up of a group of independent experts greta to monitor the en forcement of the convention european court of human rights echr in for the first time in its existence the echr established a violation of article of the european convention on human rights which sets out the prohibition against slavery servitude and forced or compulsory labour. in the case of siliadin v. france echr july the court held that french criminal law offered inadequate protection to a girl from trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur togo working in a french household in very poor circumstances against the servitude to which she was subjected by a private individual. . administrative enforcement in the sex industry . . developments in the sex industry the number of licensed sex businesses is declining. new companies where sexual services are on offer sometimes covertly and sometimes licensed include turkish coffee houses chinese and thai massage salons gay saunas couples clubs chinese barber shops nail studios and tanning studios. sex businesses are set up in some areas along the lines of the german fkk model recreational houses where arrangements can also be made with pros titutes working independently. a hustle circuit has also come into existence and internet prostitution appears to be on the increase. streetwalkers zones were closed in a number of municipalities while in others they were either maintained or opened up. no increase has been established in the number of prostitutes or victims of thb from the countries in central and eastern europe who joined the eu in . because the situation is comparable for prostitutes from romania and bulgaria who joined the eu on january the expectation is that in these cases as well the new situation will not lead to an in crease in coerced prostitution from those countries. nor is there expected to be any impact on the number of prostitutes from the new eu member states as a result of the termination of the temporary restriction on the free movement of workers. operators of sex businesses have not hitherto taken on any salaried employees but rather prefer to look for structures in terms of which the prostitutes are independent entrepreneurs and residents from the new member states are already permitted to work as independent entrepreneurs in the nether lands. . . preventive enforcement in the regulation of the prostitution industry preventive enforcement includes the granting of licences. so far as we are aware all of the municipalities which have adopted a prostitu tion policy impose as a condition of granting a licence a prohibition against putting minors or undocumented prostitutes or victims of thb to work. these municipalities have actually made a range of choices in relation to the forms of prostitution covered by the licensing sys tem. virtually all of the municipalities have included brothels and window prostitution in the licensing system. this does not apply in relation to escort companies home workers or prostitution on the street. the public administration probity screening act wet bibob is of significance if licences are granted to prospective operators in the prostitution industry. this act provides for the option of refusing to grant a licence or an extension of a licence if there is any danger that it summary is also likely to be used for the commission of criminal offences or the enjoyment of the pro ceeds of such offences. . . administrative supervision checking including administrative checks on compliance with licence conditions for run ning a sex business is undertaken by the police in most municipalities in the netherlands. supervision of licensed site specific sex businesses for example licensed clubs and window brothels is relatively speaking the most straightforward and also the most systematic. but the checks still leave something to be desired. abuses are still being discovered on the li censed circuit even though it is not clear how often because neither the police nor the mu nicipal authorities have hitherto published any national data on this. mechanisms have been developed for checking on sex businesses that are not site specific for example escort bureaus such as a protocol for supervision by arrangement also de scribed as the hotel procedure . the disadvantage of this procedure is the capacity it takes up. consideration is being given in amsterdam not only to bringing escort companies within the ambit of the licensing system but also to specifying as a condition of the licence that escort companies should have a fixed address where they maintain their staffing re cords on a day to day basis. checks on the unlicensed illegal sex industry in those places where licences are obligatory occur to a significantly lesser extent than checks on the licensed sex industry. in addition the checks are not always easy to carry out certainly where publicly accessible facilities are in volved where paid and unpaid sex can take place for example couples clubs and dating ca fes . the fact that there is less possible supervision over this sector of the sex industry means that it becomes a place of concealment for thb. the responsibility for the planning and implementation of enforcement must be fully in the hands of the local administrative authorities. the deployment of the police has to be com plementary to this. the police have a larger part to play with respect to unlicensed busi nesses but even here the initiative has to remain with the municipal authorities. this initia tive is lacking in many municipalities. . . repressive administrative enforcement in order to ensure an integrated approach it is necessary that mutual information be passed between the municipal authorities and the police on matters of potential mutual signifi cance. if the police come across relevant information in the context of administrative super vision or criminal investigation they should draw this to the municipality s attention by means of an administrative report. after all administrative intervention is only possible if the municipal authorities have the relevant information. sanctions must be imposed if li cence holders for sex companies do not observe the conditions. these may vary from a warning via a restriction of opening hours or imposition of an administrative penalty up to temporary or permanent closure and revocation of the licence. there are still some munici trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur palities whose administrators are not addressing abuses and who do not respond to admin istrative reports. . . a more sharply focussed statutory framework decentralised prostitution policy which was opted for when the general ban on brothels was lifted has resulted in local differences as regards the substance of licence conditions and also in relation to the scope of the general municipal ordinance algemene plaatselijk verordening . the differences between the various municipal licence systems result in un equal facilities for supervision and enforcement from which malafide operators as well as human traffickers can profit. as far as administrative enforcement in relation to dealing with thb in the prostitution industry is concerned the significance of a more solid statu tory framework for municipal prostitution policy lies in the fact that it would no be longer be possible for dishonest operators to set up their operations in places where they have no or less stringent licensing conditions and administrative controls to deal with. municipal authorities should therefore be obligated to regulate certain matters in their local prostitu tion policy which at the moment is only optional. . victims . . specific risk groups the report discusses several groups of possible victims. first of all minors. exploitation of minors has been known to occur in the netherlands. some important factors that render minors particularly vulnerable include emotional dependency lack of documents family circumstances and financial reasons. one vulnerable group receiving attention is made up of former amas unaccompanied underage asylum seekers. amas continue to disappear for unknown destinations and former amas whose living allowances end on their th birthdays often do not return to their countries of origin but end up involved as an illegal resident with all the concomitant risks including the possibility of exploitation. asylum seekers in general also form one of the vulnerable groups. . . victims in numbers victims in stv records one of the tasks of stv is to record suspected victims of thb. the recorded numbers have grown following a dip in victims were recorded in and in . provisional data indicates that the growth continued during . as in previous years the largest number of reports come from the police. in and the netherlands was the most frequent country of origin for victims of thb. bulgaria takes second place with nige summary ria and romania intermittently holding third and fourth places. the number and percentage of dutch victims increased steeply in and . as in previous years most of the vic tims were in the age bracket from to . the victims included three men during those two years. unfortunately the computerised stv record system still has insufficient detailed back ground information on many of the victims. victims in ind records in the ind received b applications and issued b permits. the figures for were applications and permits. the applicants included seven minors two of whom were almost certainly the children of victims. nearly all b applicants in were female with only three men among them. in one in six of the victims witnesses of thb who applied for or were granted a b residence permit were bulgarian nationals. this means that just as in and earlier years bulgaria topped the list of countries of origin of victims and witnesses with a b permit. sierra leone was in second place in . if allocated according to region of origin it ap pears that the majority of the victims and witnesses who applied for or were awarded a b residence permit came from countries that had joined the eu in and western africa and non eu countries in eastern europe. in the ind contact officials for thb recorded applications for continued residence with equal numbers being approved and rejected and at first instance. . assistance . . system oriented operation many parties are involved in combating thb. system wide collaboration among the part ners in the chain is gaining ground both as regards repression of thb and also in relation to assistance for victims. . . victim reception the increasing numbers of applications for reception have made it difficult to find suitable reception places with accommodation for victims of thb. there is not much experience yet with victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and there are few recep tion places available for male victims. opinion is divided on the question of whether assisting victims of thb requires specific ex pertise and reception specific to the category. one option being considered at the moment is a category specific reception path before victims enjoy the rights of the b regulation where it could be established what sort of care and assistance was required by the victim as well as what type of reception. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur minors who are victims of loverboys as well as girls who are under threat of being drawn into prostitution are actually placed in judicial juvenile institutions for their own protection. while it is important to detach these girls from the loverboys locking them up does not sit easily with the child s interests certainly if the treatment is delayed perhaps even for some time. . . dealing with juvenile prostitution and the loverboy problem juvenile prostitution is not the same thing as thb but developments in this area are un doubtedly relevant in the context of this report. after all if someone introduces a minor to prostitution this can certainly be considered a case of thb. the situation here is that it is not always immediately possible to detect the potential involvement of a pimp or human traf ficker. since local regional and national institutions have been exchanging information sev eral times each year concerning recent developments in the area of juvenile prostitution in the national juvenile prostitution platform landelijk platform jeugdprostitutie . the juvenile prostitution information centre informatiepunt jeugdprostitutie which operates as a na tional source of information set up the meetings for this platform in with a view to collating good practices in the field of combating juvenile prostitution. its follow up is the juvenile prostitution expertise centre expertisepunt jeugdprostitutie . various municipalities have juvenile prostitution projects and strategies or plans for them to address the loverboy problem. generally speaking these include a combination of a re porting point and arrangements for an integrated and systematic approach with the aim of preventing minors from becoming involved in prostitution preventing boys from becom ing loverboys providing adequate reception shelter and assistance for victims and investi gating and prosecuting suspects. in addition to the municipal authorities the participating organisations usually include juvenile care bureaus the police the public prosecution ser vice pps the child protection agency and local projects including those for the reception of victims. work is currently underway on a national register for juvenile prostitution. this will cover minors and young adults up to the age of who have ended up or run the risk of ending up in prostitution. . . some assistance organisations stv dutch foundation against trafficking in women plays an important part in many of the developments and initiatives in the area of helping and supporting victims of thb. for instance stv promotes a system oriented approach is setting up the recording of juvenile prostitution for reception facilities it has sounded out views on the desirability of category based reception and in conjunction with a range of chain partners it has developed a check list for continued residence in human trafficking cases which may have a part to play when an application for continued residence is lodged on humanitarian grounds. summary blinn bonded labour in the netherlands has recently set up buddy projects assisted with victim support groups and developed a range of training programs for victims. blinn can also provide a mediation service for finding courses training or voluntary work and it also has an emergency fund for victims of thb. blinn has issued pamphlets with information for victims. iom international organisation for migration offers support to victims of thb who wish to return to their country of origin sometimes making use of native counsellors. more than individuals in the la strada partner nations now numbering nine countries are actively involved in prevention information education and support for victims. iom blinn and la strada along with srtv and stv have concluded an accord in rela tion to assistance and support for victims returning to their country of origin. the scharlaken koord scarlet cord is involved in street work prevention information and social assistance in connection with prostitution and has a get out programme for women who wish to stop their involvement in prostitution. ecpat end child prostitution child pornography and the trafficking of children for sexual purposes campaigns against the commercial sexual exploitation of children un dertakes research and has developed a multidisciplinary training programme for profes sionals working with children who are victims of trafficking for sexual purposes and chil dren who run an increased risk of becoming such victims. the reception project of the refugee council stichting vluchtelingenwerk in utrecht offers assistance to former amas who are trying to decide about their future. samah founda tion for unaccompanied underage asylum seekers humanitas has developed the project beyond borders for amas and former amas offering youngsters the possibility of return ing home voluntarily and with prospects. . investigation and prosecution . . policy developments in investigation and prosecution national a new human trafficking guideline appeared in also covering exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. human trafficking was also named by the ministers of justice and internal affairs and kingdom relations and the board of procurators general as one of the six priorities in the campaign against organised crime. performance indicators are also to be designated in the field of thb. increased qualifications will also be imposed on thb prosecutors and their support staff. the national public prosecutor for human trafficking and people smuggling lovj coordinates the campaign against international organised thb from the national public prosecutor s office. for this purpose the lovj directs the national crime squad nationale recherche and maintains close contact with its subsidiary emm expertise centre on human trafficking and smuggling which collates organises and provides information on signs of thb for tactical and strategic purposes. the dutch trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur royal military constabulary siod social information and investigation service and the ind are also represented in emm. for some years now the police have had a national human trafficking expert group one of whose purposes is to aim for uniformity and co hesion in the dutch police campaign against thb. police districts also exchange operational information on thb in the human trafficking operational consultation group which meets every two months. international both the police and the pps are involved in international cooperation to combat cross border crime. police forces in the border regions of the netherlands have long collaborated with their colleagues in the neighbouring countries of germany belgium and luxembourg. in one of these collaborative arrangements human trafficking is the main priority. . . indications of human trafficking various organisations who can encounter thb in the context of inspection and enforce ment are mentioned in the human trafficking guideline. apart from the police the royal military constabulary and the municipal authorities these would include for example the health safety inspectorate arbeidsinspectie ai the social information and investiga tion service sociale inlichtingen en opsporingsdienst siod and the fiscal information and investigation service economic audit service fiscale inlichtingen en opsporingsdi enst economische controledienst fiod ecd . in recent years the police have deployed a range of activities designed to improve on their collecting and recording of signs of thb such as the further development of a thb checklist which also covers the detection of ex ploitation in other sectors than the sex industry and coerced organ removal. in addition in order to increase the knowledge of thb among all police officers a leaflet on thb has been developed and work is going on to improve the information position of criminal intelli gence units with regard to thb. this sort of activity is important because thb is not al ways recognised as such by police officers and signs of thb are not always recorded as such in police systems. on the one hand this is due to the fact that victims of thb do not always want to be recognised as such. on the other hand victims who do wish to escape free from their situation are not always found recognised or helped by the police or the aliens police. victims are not always given the opportunity to report the crime they are offered little or no time for reflection and the police process official reports themselves without consulting the pps. it is worth mentioning that the national ombudsman has established that police offi cers are obliged in principle to record any report of a criminal offence. during investigations by the siod multiple dependency on the employer which is a sign of exploitation is regularly discovered. the labour market fraud teams of the ai are in a good position to pick up indications of exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. ind employees may also be in a position to identify thb for example in asylum proceed summary ings. the ind does not yet have an internal instruction on this. all of these bodies are sup posed to pass any signs of thb to emm but this procedure needs to be improved. assistance organisations and interest groups can also spot possible thb. some non governmental organisations report indications of possible thb to the police anony mously . but because they are primarily interested in the interest of individual clients they are not always inclined to inform the police or the ai for example about exploitation situa tions. ordinary citizens can also pick up indications of thb. it is important that the public is able to recognise thb and knows what to do with the information. this is why at the start of crimestoppers stichting meld misdaad anoniem started the campaign appearances are deceptive schijn bedriegt in some regions aimed at the prostitution sector. the cam paign has produced useful reports of thb. . . investigation not every case with a clue for criminal investigation is taken up. cases are passed on some times for a lengthy period either internally to other regional police forces or to the national crime squad without any action being taken in the meantime. however other police forces and the national crime squad are generally reluctant to take up such cases. this results in stagnation case backlogs and in some cases dismissal by the police . potentially large inves tigations are also curtailed more often than is desirable into quick hit cases. capacity avail able for thb is under pressure because of performance contracts. there are however regional police forces which do invest a great deal in the fight against thb. in these forces it has been agreed for example that any sign of thb will always lead to the start of a police investigation even if no one has reported the crime yet . this can be done by aggregating information. in addition in the context of the programmatic approach to organised crime there is the thb investigation sneep in terms of which various authorities such as regional police forces the royal military constabulary siod and ind customs and municipalities col laborate using the barrier model . the programmatic approach is aimed at combating crime not only from the perspective of criminal law. this means that those involved in this case are also proceeded against via administrative law. financial investigations also take place in cluding the investigation of facilitators . the detection of thb aimed at exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry is still in its infancy. various regional police forces however are investigating cases of non sexual ex ploitation. the siod has also started investigations into thb for the purpose of labour ex ploitation. in one investigation into this type of thb resulted in prosecution and a judgment acquittal at first instance. the police successfully completed thb investigations in a higher number than in previous years. the number of investigations into domestic thb in particular increased trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur sharply in . the investigations brought to light minors of whom submitted an official report to the police. in three of the investigations the victims were forced not only to do sex work but also to conclude loans or take on debts for the suspects. at least reports of thb were submitted to the police in . . . financial investigations the human trafficking guideline stated that financial investigation should be a standard element of investigations into thb. bnrm researched the financial investigations in the thb cases that were successfully completed in . in many of the cases studied financial investigation appeared to be a standard element and confiscation of illegally obtained prof its seemed to be a strong motivator. by contrast financial investigation was bypassed if it appeared that the suspect had few assets or no illegally obtained profits. yet even then it can be worthwhile to carry out a financial investigation for example to gather evidence but also to gain an understanding of the scale of a criminal network new suspects that may be in volved the different legal sectors that might be involved or the operating methods of the criminals. a range of financial investigation methods were studied more closely. this made clear the significant importance of asking financial questions to victims in three quarters of the inves tigations where there was some financial gain and the victims were questioned about this it was possible to estimate the illegally obtained profits partly on the basis of the statements made by the victims. the profit can also be calculated on the basis of other information such as tapped telephone conversations. this is important because many victims do not wish or dare to make a statement. and it is through tapping that the ban on allowing cases of thb to continue makes itself felt if the taps show that thb is going on immediate intervention is necessary in order to remove the victims from the exploitative situation. sometimes this is at the expense of the financial investigation. searches also often lead to valuable information. in nearly three quarters of the investigations where the search focused on financial informa tion financial records sometimes a shadow set of books were indeed discovered. check ing money transfers takes up a lot of time and is far less frequently successful in terms of re sults. in a quarter of the investigations indications were found of cash flows going abroad or assets being held abroad. this only resulted in requests for foreign legal assistance in a limited number of cases however but these had positive results sometimes against all ex pectations . information was exchanged with the tax administration in a range of investigations for ex ample with a view to catching a slice of criminal profits by means of a tax surcharge. in one of the investigations studied the police investigated the thb while the siod looked into the employer fraud. the siod investigation also resulted in a confiscation case. both organisations achieved better results by sharing their knowledge and understanding. also if the suspects were acquitted of thb they can still be convicted for fraud and suffer a finan cial penalty. summary the police calculated illegally obtained profits of suspects with the average amount for each suspect being . the highest amount earned by a suspect according to these cal culations was and the lowest was . in of the thb cases success fully completed in a confiscation claim was presented. the interviewees indicated that victims hardly ever see any of the money back that they paid to the human traffickers. there are several ways in which victims can lodge a claim for com pensation. victims seldom make use of these options probably because they are not told about them or not sufficiently and clearly informed about them or because they receive very little in the way of legal assistance are unwilling to proceed from fear vengeful perpe trators or are in love loverboys or because they do not regard themselves as being a victim. . . prosecution human trafficking cases registered with the public prosecution service cases were registered with the pps in and in which also involved a sus picion of thb. the provisional figures for show a further increase. out of these cases and involved victims who were minors. the majority of the cases involved thb in aggravated circumstances. the courts did not deal with any cases of exploitation in another sector than the sex industry or organ removal in . human trafficking is generally the sole or most serious offence registered. in nearly of the cases in and there was a more serious crime charged in addition to thb usu ally some form of sexual violence. the combination with participation in a criminal or ganisation is being charged less frequently. dealing of cases by the public prosecution service and settlement by the courts the pps dealt with cases in and in . about of these resulted in a summons. virtually all of the cases brought before the courts by the pps ended up with a sentence be ing imposed in and in of the cases prosecuted and this involved im prisonment in and of the cases respectively. sentences in relation to thb were issued in the period from to . in of those cases unconditional imprisonment was imposed with an average sentence of about months. about of the cases in and of those in were appealed most of them jointly or solely by the accused. the accused three quarters of the accused in thb cases registered with the pps in and were between the age of and . there were underage suspects in and the same number in . more than were male with the number of female suspects varying markedly according to country of origin. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur again in and the netherlands was the most common country of birth for the suspects with turkey and romania having reasonably stable positions in the top five coun tries of origin. there was a marked increase in the incidence of morocco as the country of birth for suspects with hungary also coming into this picture and bulgaria and the former yugoslavia playing a lesser part. . exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry . . definition of terms the introduction of the new thb article has not resulted in clear cut dividing line between poor employer conduct and conduct that deemed to be exploitation as defined in article f paragraph dutch criminal code. what is clear though is that the legal expression exploitation covers extremely poor working conditions where human rights are at stake. this can be due to a single obvious excess or an excess consisting of an accumulation of less serious abuses. the indicators that might point towards exploitation include physical vio lence against an employee coerced dangerous work unreasonable working hours under payment working to pay off debts and dependence on the employer for for example ac commodation and documentation. in relation to thb the expressions labour and services are not confined to formal em ployment relationships. nor is it necessary for the exploiter to be the employer or to be pre sent in the workplace. practices that can border on thb for non sexual exploitation include illegal adoption rack rent housing and forced marriages. . . the criterion for exploitation used bnrm conducted an exploratory study into serious abuse in employment situations. cases descriptions were collected dating from to the start of . the criterion for exploitation in the meaning of thb applied in this study was based on the combination of on the one hand the impossibility to leave the situation as a constant factor and on the other hand as variable factors coercion bad labour conditions and multiple de pendency. when assessing a particular case factors such as the duration of the situation the degree of organisation and the age of the victim were also taken into consideration. apply ing this criterion exploitation as defined in article f dutch criminal code was found in of the case descriptions. the research thus shows that exploitation in other sec tors than the sex industry is going on in the netherlands but it does not reveal the scale of the problem. . . risk sectors illegal employment is a substantial element of the underbelly of the dutch economy. in con cealed circuits of malafide employment agencies employees have difficulty protecting summary themselves against abuse particularly if they are undocumented migrants. it is clear from the cases on domestic work and ethnic entrepreneurship that exploitation often occurs in hidden employment situations. the collected case descriptions were drawn from sectors. the respondents mostly described situations in the temporary employment sector agricul ture and horticulture the catering industry with the most significant subcategory being chinese restaurants and domestic work. as far as domestic work is concerned three types of employer merit special attention relatives au pair host families and foreign diplomats. . . characteristics and risk groups the new definition of the offence of thb has changed the numerical relationship between men and women among the victims and potential victims of thb. this has consequences for among other things the image of the offence and for how to provide victim assistance. a marginal position in the dutch labour market and or society may render individuals vul nerable to exploitation. residence permit status age and psychological disposition have a part to play in this respect. many undocumented migrants are unaware of their rights do not dare to make any claims against employers and as far as possible avoid contact with the authorities. minors are generally more vulnerable than adults. clearly putting a minor to work does not necessarily constitute exploitation but if an employer makes a child do more or harder work than permitted this abuse can in combination with others amount to an excess. in cases with possibly underage victims of exploitation extra care is not yet a standard measure. il legal residence can hamper the attention that is required in terms of identification reception and assistance also in reporting the crime of possibly exploited children. . . dealing with exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry little is yet known about the characteristics and operating methods of perpetrators of thb with a view to exploitation in other sectors than the sex industry. it appears that the exploiter and the victim often belong to the same ethnic group. exploitation sometimes occurs within relationships and families. efforts to prevent and combat exploitation outside the sex industry are still in the early stages. certainly in this phase it is important that inspectors and detectives who enter the shop floor should be alert to any signs of exploitations and should be aware of the fact that there may be possible victims of thb among undocumented migrant workers. a victim oriented approach to thb requires that they should be informed about their rights. it is not yet possible to report on how the dutch courts deal with exploitation outside the sex industry. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . human trafficking with a view to organ removal there are scarcely any indications that thb with a view to organ removal takes place in the netherlands but the shortage of available organs for transplant purposes may lead to organ tourism travelling abroad for transplants organ trade commercial transplants or thb for organ removal. . . organ donation the organ donation act wet op de orgaandonatie wod sets out the rules for the re moval of organs. the most important conditions are permission from the donor or on do nation after death from the surviving relatives and provision of the organ free of charge. in the netherlands someone who has not indicated that his permission for the removal of or gans is not in principle available as a donor. the wod criminalises the removal of organs without permission. in certain circumstances this will also amount to thb which carries the threat of a heavier punishment. . . trade in organs trade in organs includes offering organs for sale selling and or purchasing them and medi ating between the seller and purchaser with a view to profit. there is an ongoing debate on the desirability of free market processes in relation to organ transplants. some argue that commercialising the body renders exploitation inevitable. others do not regard commercialisation as objectionable in principle and argue for certain forms of organ trade to be allowed. the point has to be made that there are economic and medical risks associated with the voluntary sale of organs for instance when no proper af tercare is provided. the trade in organs is formally permitted in a few countries. news re ports on illegal organs trade are difficult to verify. in china the authorities appear to have been involved in organ removal without permission from prisoners who were executed. dutch citizens who buy an organ abroad are not deemed guilty of committing a criminal of fence under dutch law unless coercion has been used. . . human trafficking with a view to organ removal there is a distinction to be drawn between the trade in organs and thb with a view to organ removal. the trade in organs is not by definition involuntary whereas the definition of thb at least when it regards adults incorporates the use of coercion. article f dutch criminal code concerns forcibly purchasing transporting or taking another person with the purpose of removing organs. this provision also applies to dutch citizens who commit this offence abroad provided that it also constitute a crime in the country in question. who ever induces a minor without or without coercion to make his or her organs available for remuneration will be guilty of thb article f paragraph . dutch criminal code . summary . . interviews among medical practitioners interviews with kidney specialists transplant coordinators a transplant surgeon a doctor with the anwb and two kidney patients show that there is virtually no trade in organs in the netherlands. still many of the respondents argued for increased alertness now that the number of living donors is on the increase. with living donors the relationship and motives of the donor and recipient are not always investigated thoroughly so that there can be a risk of donation with a view to profit or as a result of coercion or manipulation. in all university hospitals in the netherlands it has been know to occur that foreign relatives of kidney patients principally those of foreign heritage come to the netherlands in order to donate a kidney. there is no reliable information on dutch patients who go abroad to have an organ implant but the kidney specialists who were interviewed were aware of accounts of patients who had undergone kidney transplants abroad. only very rarely did they have indications that payment was made for a kidney abroad but these possibly escape them be cause patients do not often talk about this with their specialists. with one exception the doc tors indicated that they had never cooperated with a patient who wanted to undergo a paid transplant abroad. the exception related to a patient who wanted to have a commercial transplant in iran his country of origin where this is permitted. . conclusion recommendations the report contains a large number of recommendations on a range of topics namely legis lation and regulations government policy law enforcement in the sex industry prevention public awareness assistance to victims detection investigation prosecution and trials in ternational cooperation and registration and scientific research. these can be found in chapter . bibliography this bibliography is an annex to the original dutch report not all references thus appear in the current english translation. aa a.van der concept z.jr. . ketenaanpak tegen mensenhandel. resultaatgericht samenwerken voor slachtoffers en daders van seksuele en economische uitbuiting. amersfoort stv. adviescommissie voor vreemdelingenzaken a . kinderen en de asielpraktijk. de positie van het kind voor tijdens en na de asielprocedure tegen de achtergrond van het internationaal recht. bijlagen behorende het advies. den haag acvz. adviescommissie voor vreemdelingenzaken b . kinderen en de asielprocedure. de positie van het kind voor tijdens en na de asielprocedure tegen de achtergrond van het internationaal recht. den haag acvz. adviesraad internationale vraagstukken . from internal to external borders. recommendations for developing a common eu asylum and migration policy by . den haag aiv. aebi m.f. e.a. . european sourcebook of crime and criminal justice statistics . third edition. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. akinbing l .f. . knooppunt istanbul. mensensmokkel via turkije. amsterdam meulenhoff. altink s.m. bokelman s. . rechten van prostituees . amsterdam de rode draad. amnesty international . people s republic of china executed according to law the death penalty in china. london amnesty international. anderson b. o connell davidson j. . part ii the demand side of trafficking. a multi country pilot study. z.pl. z.u.. anderson b. o connell davidson j. . is trafficking in human beings demand driven a multi country pilot study. geneva iom. anderson b. rogaly b. . forced labour and migration to the uk. london trades union congress. anderson b. e.a. . fair enough central and east european migrants in low wage employment in the uk. york joseph rowntree foundation. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur anti slavery international . sub regional project of eradicating child domestic work and child trafficking in west and central africa. code of conduct. londen anti slavery international. asante a. schaapman k. . het onzichtbare zichtbaar gemaakt. prostitutie in amsterdam anno . amsterdam partij van de arbeid. baets ph. de . de rol en functie van de sociale inspectiediensten in de strijd tegen de mensenhandel. panopticon.tijdschrift voor strafrecht criminologie en forensisch welzijnswerk . bakels h.l. e.a. . schets van het nederlands arbeidsrecht. deventer kluwer. bales k. . disposable people. new slavery in the global economy. berkeley los angeles london university of california press. belser p. e.a. . ilo minimum estimate of forced labour in the world. geneva ilo. benseddik a. bijl m. . onzichtbaar achter glas. onderzoek naar de bijdrage van illegalen in de glastuinbouwsector van het westland. den haag stek voor stad en kerk. bitter c. veldhuis r. . de wet bibob een tussenstand. nederlands juristenblad . boer m. de wijers m. . taking women s rights seriously an examination of the fourth report by the government of the netherlands on implementation of the un convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women cedaw . utrecht humanist committee on human rights. boermans b. . uitgebuit en in de bak. slachtoffers van mensenhandel in vreemdelingenbewaring. terecht . borne a. van der kloosterboer k. . inzicht in uitbuiting. handel in minderjarigen in nederland nader onderzocht. amsterdam dci nederland. borne a. van der kloosterboer k. . investigating exploitation research into trafficking in children in the netherlands. amsterdam dci the netherlands. bos ollerman h. . trafficking in human beings. investigating the legitimacy and implications of a human rights approach. leiden universiteit leiden doctoraalscriptie . bovenkerk f. e.a. . loverboys of modern pooierschap in amsterdam. utrecht willem pompe instituut voor strafwetenschappen. bressers h. e.a. evaluatie handhaven op niveau. enschede cstm universiteit twente. brouns m. kramer s. cense m. . het lange wachten op een veilige toekomst. onderzoek naar veiligheid van vrouwen en meisjes in asielzoekersopvang. rijswijk coa. bibliography brugman d. . lust of last over de beleidsmatige en juridische aspectien van het lokale prostitutitebeleid. nederlands tijdschrift voor bestuursrecht . bullens r. horn e. van . daad uit liefde . gedwongen prostitutie van jonge meisjes. justiti le verkenningen . bunt h.g. van de . financieel rechercheren is geen nieuw kunstje. justiti le verkenningen . cachet a. . bestel in beweging beweging in het bestel het tijdschrift voor de politie . cardol g. . ontheemd vreemd en minderjarig. het recht op ontwikkeling van de alleenstaande minderjarige vreemdeling in inter nationale wet en regelgeving. nijmegen wolf legal publishers. centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding . strijd tegen de mensenhandel aandacht voor de slachtoffers. jaarverslag . brussel centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding . strijd tegen de mensenhandel tussen beleid en middelen de diepe kloof jaarverslag . brussel centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding . mensenhandel rechtspraak. brussel centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding . strijd tegen mensenhandel pleidooi voor een integrale benadering. analyse wetgeving en rechtspraak. jaarverslag . brussel centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding . rapport mensenhandel. het belgische mensenhandelbeleid gewikt en gewogen. brussel centrum voor gelijkheid van kansen en voor racismebestrijding. claassen s. . dan moeten ze hun mond maar open doen slachtoffers van mensenhandel in vreemdelingenbewaring. amsterdam blinn. cleiren c.p.m. nijboer j.f. . strafrecht. tekst commentaar. deventer kluwer. college van procureurs generaal . aanwijzing ontneming. college van procureurs generaal. college van procureurs generaal aanwijzing mensenhandel. college van procureurs generaal. connor j. committee on equal opportunities for women and men . domestic slavery. group of the european people s party ierland. coster r. . afsluitende rapportage. den haag politie regio haaglanden. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur coster r. . prostitutie en mensenhandel. korpsmonitor . den haag ppm dnp. cyrus n. . traffficking for labour and sexual exploitation in germany. z.pl. ilo. daalder a.l. . het bordeelverbod opgeheven. den haag wodc. delmonico f. . no payments for organs. in gutmann t. e.a. eds ethical legal and social issues in organ transplantation pp. . lengerich pabst science publishers. dienst nationale recherche informatie . nationaal dreigingsbeeld zware of georganiseerde criminaliteit. een eerste proeve. zoetermeer klpd nri. dijk e.m.h. van . mensenhandel in nederland . zoetermeer klpd dnp. dijke a. van e.a. . de betovering verbroken. methodiek preventie en aanpak meisjesprostitutie. amsterdam swp uitgeverij. dottridge m. . reference guide on protecting the rights of child victims of trafficking in europe. geneva unicef. ecpat . minderjarigen in de prostitutie in nederland een quick scan. amsterdam ecpat. eekeren l.g.j. van . eindrapportage plan van aanpak loverboys . zwolle gemeente zwolle. eiff v.l. e.a. . resultaten nulmeting wet bibob . utrecht berenschot. engee j. e.a. . witwassen en voordeelontneming. deel . zoetermeer klpd kennispunt financieel rechercheren. eurojust . jaarverslag . den haag eurojust. faber w. nunen a.a.a. van . het ei van colombo. oss faber organisatievernieuwing b.v. fazel i. . renal transplantation in iran the iranian model. in gutmann t. e.a. eds ethical legal and social issues in organ transplantation pp. . lengerich pabst science publishers. fijnaut c. spapens t. . criminaliteit en rechtshandhaving in de euregio maas rijn. deel . de problemen van transnationale georganiseerde criminaliteit en de grensoverschrijdende politi le justiti le en bestuurlijke samenwerking. antwerpen oxford intersentia. flight s. e.a. . evaluatie opheffing bordeelverbod. gemeentelijk beleid. amsterdam dsp groep. fnv . jij jerzy. grievencahier over de behandeling van poolse en andere buitenlandse werknemers in nederland in . utrecht fnv. friedman e.a. friedman a.l. . payment for donor kidneys pros and cons. kidney international . bibliography friele r.d. e.a. . derde evaluatie. wet op de orgaandonatie. den haag zonmw. gallagher a.t. . human trafficking international law and international responsibility. a critical examination of the international legal response to human trafficking with a particular focus on the state responsibility regime as a means of securing greater accountability of governments for trafficking an related exploitation. utrecht universiteit van utrecht. gemeente den haag . plan van aanpak loverboysproblematiek . den haag gemeente den haag. gervais c.l.m. . report on promising practices for the prevention of human trafficking. ottawa national crime prevention centre department of public safety and emergency preparedness canada. goderie m. e.a. . illegaliteit onvrijwilligheid en minderjarigheid in de prostitutie een jaar na de opheffing van het bordeelverbod. den haag utrecht verwey jonker instituut wodc ministerie van justitie. goudswaard k.p. heerma vos g.j.j. van . handhaving in de sociale zekerheid. in herwijer m. ed. sociale zekerheid voor het oog van de meester pp. . deventer kluwer. goyal m. e.a. . economic and health consequences of selling a kidney in india. american medical association . graaf h. de e.a. . seks onder je e. seksuele gezondheid van jongeren in nederland anno . utrecht rutgers nisso groep soa aids nederland. grijpink j.h.a.m. . identiteitsfraude als uitdaging voor de rechtstaat. www.keteninformatisering.nl . grijpink j.h.a.m. . keteninformatisering in kort bestek. theorie en praktijk van grootschalige informatie uitwisseling. den haag uitgeverij lemma. gutmann t. e.a. eds. . ethical legal and social issues in organ transplantation. lengerich pabst science publishers. hartogh g. van den . gift of bijdrage over morele aspecten van orgaandonatie. den haag rathenau instituut. h yry p. . human organ trafficking size of the industry and means of regulation. gutmann t. e.a. eds ethical legal and social issues in organ transplantation pp. . lengerich pabst science publishers. hiemstra r.r.k. hurkens m.j. . analyse huidig coa beleid en instrumentarium voor bestrijding van mensenhandel. project bestrijding mensenhandel. z.pl. coa. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur hiemstra r.r.k. hurkens m.j. . gevalsstudie mensenhandel coa. onderzoeksopzet en rapportage als onderdeel van de ori ntatiefase van het project bestrijding mensenhandel. z.pl. coa. hilhorst m.t. . nierdonatie bij leven ethische vragen bij een dynamische praktijk. ethiek en recht in de gezondheidszorg . hoffer c. zwart h. . orgaandonatie en de betekenis van levenbeschouwelijke opvattingen. medische antropologie . hoogenboom a.b. e.a. . financieel rechercheren. den haag vuga uitgeverij b.v. hoogenboom b. . operationele betrokkenheid. prestatiesturing en bedrijfsvoering nederlandse politie. den haag elsevier overheid. hopkins r. . ik laat je nooit meer gaan. het meisje de vrouw de handelaar en de agent. breda de geus. hughes d.m. . best practices to address the demand side of sex trafficking. z.pl. z.u. huisman w. e.a. . het van traa project. evaluatie van de bestuurlijke aanpak van georganiseerde criminaliteit in amsterdam. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. human rights watch . organ procurement and judicial execution in china. new york human rights watch. human rights watch . blood sweat and fear. worker s right in the u.s. meath and poultry plants. new york human rights watch. ijzermans j.n.m. . orgaantransplantatie waar liggen de grenzen rotterdam erasmus mc. inspectie jeugdzorg . doelgerichte ontwikkeling ama s. onderzoek bij coa ama locaties en nidos regiokantoren. utrecht inspectie jeugdzorg. inspectie openbare orde en veiligheid . opsporing bezocht. rapportage over de eerste fase van het onderzoek naar de kwaliteit van de politi le opsporingstaak. den haag ioov. international labour office . a global alliance against forced labour. global report under the follow up to the ilo declaration on fundamental principles and rights at work . geneva ilo. jacobs m.j.g. bruinsma m.y. haaf j. van . de kwaliteit van de rechtsbijstand voor vreemdelingen in vreemdelingenbewaring in nederland. nijmegen wolf legal publishers. jochoms m.p.c.m. e.a. . op prestatie gericht. over de gevolgen van prestatiesturing en prestatieconvenanten voor sturing en uitvoering van het politiewerk. den haag elsevier overheid. bibliography kalmthout a.m. van e.a. . terugkeermogelijkheden van vreemdelingen in de vreemdelingenbewaring. de vreemdelingenbewaring in tilburg en ter apel. het dossieronderzoek. deel . nijmegen wolf legal publishers. kalmthout a.m. van e.a. . terugkeermogelijkheden van vreemdelingen in de vreemdelingenbewaring. evaluatie terugkeerprojecten. deel . nijmegen wolf legal publishers. kalmthout a.m. van e.a. . terugkeermogelijkheden van vreemdelingen in de vreemdelingenbewaring. het vergeten gelaat van de vreemdeling. deel . nijmegen wolf legal publishers. klaasen h.m. prez r.m. de . eindevaluatie ama campus. opvangen en opvoeden van alleenstaande minderjarige asielzoekers. den haag ministerie van justitie. kleemans e.r. . crossing borders organised crime in the netherlands. in fijnaut c. e.a. eds. organised crime in europe. concepts patterns and control policies in the european union and beyond pp. . dordrecht springer. klpd dienst nationale recherche . criminaliteitsbeeld . driebergen klpd dnr. klpd dienst nationale recherche . mensenhandel. deelrapport criminaliteitsbeeld . driebergen klpd dnr. knaapen r. . netwerk opvang slachtoffers van mensenhandel. noord oost brabant. voortgangsverslag . s hertogenbosch stichting maatschappelijke dienstverlening. knotter j.c. . nuad thai. een etnografisch onderzoek naar thaise massagesalons in nederland. amsterdam universiteit van amsterdam. kohlman c. . er is een land waar vrouwen kunnen werken. de positie van domestic workers in nederland. in kohlman c. e.a. eds. vrouwen in het migratiebeleid pp. . den haag e quality. koppen p.j. van . financieel rechercheren in de opsporing. justiti le verkenningen . korf d.j. e.a. . tippelen na de zone. straatprostitutie en verborgen prostitutie in amsterdam. amsterdam rozenberg publishers. korvinus a.g. e.a. . mensenhandel het begrip uitbuiting in art. a sr. trema . kriek f. . eindevaluatie jeugdpreventie plan gouda . eindrapport. amsterdam regioplan beleidsonderzoek. kromhout m.c.h. leystra y.h. . terugkeer en mob bij alleenstaande minderjarige vreemdelingen. landelijk beleid en lokale praktijk. den haag wodc. kruyer f. . de huishouding op orde. blauw recherche . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur lawson r.a. . noot bij jv . den haag sdu uitgevers. lazerges c. vidalies a. . l esclavage en france aujourd hui. paris assembl e nationale. leun j. van der vervoorn l. . slavernij achtige uitbuiting in nederland. een inventariserende literatuurstudie in het kader van de uitbreiding van de strafbaarstelling van mensenhandel. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. logo . de rekening. de praktijk van het opvang en terugkeerbeleid. groningen logo. lovs . bundel voor strafrechtspleging. lovs bundel . den haag lovs. lugt a. van der zoetekouw r. . de strijd tegen georganiseerde illegale arbeid het barri remodel. in h. wietzema menkhorst e.a. eds. jaarboek fraudebestrijding. alphen a d rijn kluwer. l nnemann k. e.a. . ernstig bedreigde vrouwen in de vrouwenopvang. onderzoek naar veiligheidsrisico s en de mogelijkheden van onderduikadressen. utrecht verweij jonker instituut federatie opvang. majoor m. . als sex werken wordt. amsterdam prostitutie informatie centrum. matas d. kilgour d. . bloody harvest. revised report into allegations of organ harvesting of falun gong practitioners in china. ottawa z.u. meloen j. e.a. . buit en besteding. een empirisch onderzoek naar de omvang de kenmerken en de besteding van misdaadgeld. den haag elsevier overheid. mens l. van . prostitutie in bedrijf. organisatie management en arbeidsverhoudingen in seksclubs en priv huizen. delft eburon. meuwese s. c.s. . handboek internationaal jeugdrecht. nijmegen ars aequi libri. miedema f. e.a. . evaluatie au pair regeling. nijmegen its. minister voor vreemdelingen en integratie . illegalennota. aanvullende maatregelen voor het tegengaan van illegaliteit en de aanpak van uitbuiters van illegalen in nederland. den haag ministerie van justitie. ministerie van binnenlandse zaken en koninkrijksrelaties ministerie van justitie de nederlandse politie . landelijk kader nederlandse politie . den haag ministerie van binnenlandse zaken en koningrijksrelaties ministerie van justitie politie. minister van justitie . plan van aanpak. ordening bescherming prostitutiesector. aanvullende maatregelen voor het bereiken van de doelstellingen bij de opheffing van het algemeen bordeelverbod. den haag ministerie van justitie. bibliography ministerie van justitie directie handhaving . nationaal actieplan mensenhandel. aanvullende maatregelen van het kabinet in het kader van de aanpak van mensenhandel in nederland. den haag ministerie van justitie. moors j.a. borgers m.j. . knelpunten in de internationale samenwerking in ontnemingszaken. tilburg iva. mosselman m. rij c. van . naleving van de wet arbeid vreemdelingen. een eerste onderzoek onder werkgevers. amsterdam regioplan beleidsonderzoek. munro v.e. . stopping traffic a comparative study of responses to the trafficking in women for prostitution. british journal of criminology . nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . mensenhandel eerste rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur. den haag bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . mensenhandel derde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur. den haag bnrm. nationaal rapporteur mensenhandel . mensenhandel. aanvullende kwantitatieve gegevens.vierde rapportage van de nationaal rapporteur. den haag bnrm. nelen j. e.a. . het vermogen te ontnemen wetsevaluatie fase . den haag wodc. nelen j. sabee v. . het vermogen te ontnemen evaluatie van de ontnemingswetgeving eindrapport. den haag wodc. nuyts g. e.a. . awareness raising of judicial authorities concerning in human beings. handbook volume . country reports european legal frameworks. the hague iom. o briain m. e.a. . joint east west research on trafficking in children for sexual purposes in europe the sending countries. amsterdam ecpat. o connell davidson j. . part i review of evidence and debates on the demand side of trafficking . z.pl. z.u. oepkes n. e.a. . perspectief. als de toekomst onzeker is. utrecht vluchtelingenwerk. openbaar ministerie . de strafrechtelijke aanpak van georganiseerde misdaad in nederland . den haag openbaar ministerie. openbaar ministerie . perspectief op . den haag openbaar ministerie. otten l. . the un trafficking protocol. conciliating different perspectives on human trafficking utrecht z.u. pajnik m. kavcic u. . the demand side of sex perspectives on trafficking and prostitution. the case of slovenia. ljubljana mirovni institute. pearson e. . coercion in the kidney trade a background study on trafficking in human organs worldwide. eschborn gtz. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur peters j. . van wie is de politie eigenlijk het tijdschrift voor de politie . pheijffer m. e.a. . financieel rechercheren. theorie en praktijk. deventer kluwer. politie nederland . wenkend perspectief. strategische visie op politieel informatiemanagement technologie . driebergen politie nederland. politieacademie . leerboek ontneming. zutphen politieacademie. poot c.j. de e.a. . rechercheportret. over dilemma s in de opsporing. alphen a d rijn kluwer. projectgroep visie op de politiefunctie raad van hoofdcommissarissen . politie in ontwikkeling. visie op de politiefunctie. den haag npi. punt h.g. . praktijkboek ontneming van het wederrechtelijk verkregen voordeel. den haag sdu uitgevers. raad voor de rechtspraak . jaarverslag . den haag raad voor de rechtspraak. regiopolitie ijsselland kernteam noord en oost nederland unit mensensmokkel klpd dnri iam z.jr. . protocol vermissing ama. z.pl. z.u. reputur l. . werkplan . informatiepunt jeugdprostitutie. utrecht transact informatiepunt jeugdprostitutie. reputur l. . meerjarenplan jeugdprostitutie . jeugdprostitutie hoe staan we ervoor naar een expertisepunt jeugdprostitutie. utrecht transact informatiepunt jeugdprostitutie. rijken c. . van asielzoekster tot prostituee. nemesis . rijken c. . joint investigation teams principles practice and problems lessons learnt from the first efforts to establish a jit. utrecht law review . rijkschroeff b.r. . etnisch ondernemerschap. de chinese horeceasector in nederland en in de verenigde staten van amerika. groningen rijksuniversiteit van groningen. rothman d.j. e.a. . the bellagio task force report on transplantation bodily integrity and the international traffic in organs. transplantation proceedings . rothman s.m. rothman d.j. . the organ market. the new york review of books . ruijmschoot l. . domestic work decent work opmaat naar campagne ter verbetering van de arbeidsomstandigheden bij huishoudelijk werk wereldwijd. utrecht cnv internationaal. samah . jaarverslag . z.pl. samah. scharlaken koord z.jr. . methodiek uitstapprogramma. z.pl. z.u. bibliography scheper hughes n. . the end of the body commodity fetishism and the global traffic in organs. sais review . schmidt g.e. rijken c.r.j.j. . juridische aspecten van gedwongen huwelijken. onderzoek voor de adviescommissie voor vreemdelingenzaken. den haag acvz. schravendijk s.m. van . de handel in organen stand van zaken en discussie. een thesis over de internationale orgaanhandel mensenhandel met het oogmerk van orgaanverwijdering de betrokkenheid van nederland ers en het ethische debat hieromtrent. utrecht universiteit van utrecht doctoraalscriptie . secherling p.h.t. nelen j.m. . financieel rechercheren in nederland. een literatuurverkenning. den haag wodc. sikkel d. e.a. methoden voor omvangschattingen van verborgen populaties met name illegalen. den haag wodc. siod . de bestrijding van uitbuiting met slavernijachtige kenmerken binnen het domein van werk en inkomen. den haag siod. skriv nkov k. . trafficking for forced labour. uk country report. london anti slavery international. sluis a. van der e.a. . cijfers en stakeholders. prestatiesturing en de gevolgen voor de maatschappelijke en politiek bestuurlijke relaties van de politie. den haag elsevier overheid. soudijn m.r.i. . chinese human smuggling in transit. den haag boom juridische uitgevers. steunpunt seksueel geweld ggd . naar een aanpak van loverboyproblematiek. visie en ervaringen van amsterdamse deskundigen. amsterdam steunpunt seksueel geweld ggd. stichting religieuzen tegen vrouwenhandel . verslag van het srtv lustrumjaar . den bosch srtv. stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . jaarverslag . amersfoort stv. stichting tegen vrouwenhandel . werkplan . amersfoort stv. svb forensic business experts investigators . evaluatie grote ontnemingszaken. den haag wodc. taskforce vrouwen veiligheid en conflict . slotdocument taskforce vrouwen veiligheid en conflict. den haag taskforce vrouwen veiligheid en conflict. terpstra l. e.a. . loverboys een publieke zaak. tien portretten. amsterdam uitgeverij swp terpstra van dijke. tinnemans w. . een grensoverschrijdende kwestie. rapportage van een activerend onderzoek naar illegalen in illegale arbeid. utrecht amsterdam stichting bmp. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur transact informatiepunt jeugdprostitutie . werkplan . utrecht transact. tweede kamer der staten generaal . nationaal actieplan mensenhandel. den haag tweede kamer der staten generaal. unger b. . de omvang en het effect van witwassen. justiti le verkenningen . united nations office for drug control and crime . trafficking in persons. global patterns. vienna unodc. vermeulen g. . matroesjka s tien jaar later. repressie en controle als speerpunten van het vernieuwde mensenhandelbeleid . panopticon.tijdschrift voor strafrecht criminologie en forensisch welzijnswerk . vermeulen g. e.a. . the siamsect files. standarised templates and blueprint for eu wide collection of statistical information and analysis on missing and sexually exploited children and trafficking in human beings. antwerpen maklu uitgevers. verrest p.a.m. . de strafbaarstelling van witwassen. justiti le verkenningen . verrest p.a.m. buruma y. . waarom pakken we het criminele geld niet gewoon af justiti le verkenningen . vianen r. van e.a. . monitor over de positie van slachtoffers mensenhandel in nederland. woerden adviesbureau van montfoort. vlek f. e.a. . uit balans politie en bestel in de knel. state of the art van kennis en inzichten. zeist kerckebosch. wegen j. van der . het fiscale vangnet. recherchemagazine . wegen j.van der . de verzilvering van de ontneming. recherche magazine . wegen j.van der . tegen haar wil. blauw recherche . wolf j. e.a. . maat en baat van de vrouwenopvang. onderzoek naar vraag en aanbod. amsterdam swp uitgevers. z.a. . eindrapportage landelijke escortpilot. z.pl. z.u. zimmerman c. e.a. . stolen smiles a summary report on the physical and psychological health consequences of women and adolescents trafficked in europe. london the london school of hygiene tropical medicine. appendix thb provision in the dutch criminal code article f criminal code in force since january non official english translation any person who . by force violence or other act by the threat of violence or other act by extortion fraud deception or the misuse of authority arising from the actual state of affairs by the misuse of a vulnerable position or by giving or receiving remuneration or benefits in order to obtain the consent of a person who has control over this other person recruits trans ports moves accommodates or shelters another person with the intention of exploiting this other person or removing his or her organs . recruits transports moves accommodates or shelters a person with the intention of ex ploiting that other person or removing his or her organs when that person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years . recruits takes with him or abducts a person with the intention of inducing that person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration in another country . forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to make him self herself available for performing work or services or making his her organs available or takes any action in the circumstances referred to under which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know will result in that other person making himself herself available for performing labour or services or making his her organs available . induces another person to make himself herself available for performing sexual acts with or for a third party for remuneration or to make his her organs available for remunera tion or takes any action towards another person which he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that this will result in that other person making himself herself avail able for performing these acts or making his her organs available for remuneration when that other person has not yet reached the age of eighteen years . wilfully profits from the exploitation of another person . wilfully profits from the removal of organs from another person while he knows or may reasonably be expected to know that the organs of that person have been removed under the circumstances referred to under . wilfully profits from the sexual acts of another person with or for a third party for remu neration or the removal of that person s organs for remuneration when this other per son has not yet reached the age of eighteen years trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur . forces or induces another person by the means referred to under a to provide him with the proceeds of that person s sexual acts with or for a third party or of the removal of that person s organs shall be guilty of trafficking in human beings and as such liable to a term of imprisonment not exceeding six years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties exploitation comprises at least the exploitation of another person in prostitution other forms of sexual exploitation forced or compulsory labour or services slavery slavery like practices or servitude. the following offences shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding eight years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties . offences as described in the first paragraph if they are committed by two or more per sons acting in concert . offences as described in the first paragraph if such offences are committed in respect of a person who is under the age of sixteen. the offences as described in the first paragraph committed by two or more persons act ing in concert under the circumstance referred to in paragraph under b shall be punish able with a term of imprisonment not exceeding ten years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. if one of the offences described in the first paragraph results in serious physical injury or threatens the life of another person it shall be punishable with a term of imprisonment not exceeding twelve years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. if one of the offences referred to in the first paragraph results in death it shall be punish able with a term of imprisonment not exceeding fifteen years and a fifth category fine or either of these penalties. article is applicable mutatis mutandis. a fifth category fine is a fine of maximum appendix justification of research methods used bnrm collects information in a variety of ways. this appendix explains the aims research questions and methods used for the various bnrm studies. the b research aim and research questions in principle bnrm annually researches the files supplied by the ind which include all ap plications for and grants of residence permits in the context of the b regulation. for vari ous reasons the current report only covers . the research questions are how many victims witnesses applied for a b residence permit how many victims witnesses were awarded a b residence permit what are the background characteristics of individuals holding a b residence permit in which police districts did the applications for b residence permits originate research method the ind supplied files containing all contacts for the period from to where the b regulation played some part. these files accordingly contained all applications for b residence permits or extensions of them and all approvals. bnrm aggregated all of the files at the individual level and collated them. this file was then subjected to more detailed analysis. this process highlighted a number of inadequacies. we learned from consultations with the ind that these shortcomings were the result of technical problems that arose through the ind taking over the aliens administration which was previously the duty of the aliens police. various attempts have been made to clean up the registration systems. the re sults for and remained unsatisfactory however. this is why it was decided to re port only on . incidental comments on the research firstly the ind s registration is not consistent and or unambiguous on whether applica tions and awards of residence permits are linked to the b regulation. the result is that someone applying for a residence permit under the b regulation may be registered as hav ing obtained a permit on different grounds. the reverse is also true b residence permits were granted to individuals who had not applied for them when they were first registered. all of these individuals have been included in the analyses on the assumption that they relied on the b regulation either in their application or when a permit was awarded. it is possible that these files did not include every individual who invoked the b regulation as reliance on the b regulation is not registered by the ind as a matter of course or compulsorily. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur secondly the ind does not record whether an individual obtains a b residence permit as a victim or as a witness. thirdly the b data relates only to victims and witnesses of thb who are residing in the netherlands illegally. additionally the ind files only include data on individuals eligible for a temporary residence permit because they have reported the crime of thb. victims are not registered by the ind during the period available to them for reflection. the bnrm police study aim and research questions in each of the earlier reports bnrm included many details of successfully concluded inves tigations into thb. since the beginning of bnrm is now only collecting certain key information regarding these investigations. the aim of the current police research was to obtain an understanding of the number of successfully completed police investigations into thb. the research questions are how many investigations for thb did the police successfully complete in the netherlands in how many official reports witness statements did these investigations relate to what type of sex work were the victims supposed to do research method all of the investigations into thb which were successfully completed in were listed in the now customary fashion. the total number was . the team leaders for these investiga tions were interviewed by telephone. the questions asked in this interview based on a short questionnaire related to the general characteristics of the thb concerned. we also asked questions about the extent of any financial investigation that might have accompanied the detective work. the bnrm research into financial investigations aim and research questions the aim of the research was to establish the part played by financial investigation in the suc cessfully completed criminal investigations into thb or what part such investigation might have played. the research questions concerning five sub areas are financial investigations in thb cases input to what extent is financial investigation undertaken in thb cases from the start i.e. what efforts are made to obtain financial information record it accurately and analyse it which factors determine whether or not this happens appendix how is the financial investigation undertaken do thb cases have any especially significant features for financial investigations what bottlenecks occur during financial investigations in thb cases how could financial investigations in thb cases be encouraged financial investigations in thb cases output to what extent are the potential aims of financial investigations achieved does financial investigation also produce other valuable results how are illegally obtained profits calculated to what extent are confiscation procedures deployed in thb cases to what extent is money successfully confiscated in thb cases missed opportunities how often is there wrongly a failure to carry out financial investigation in thb cases what are the reasons for this alternatives are there other ways to attack human traffickers in financial terms apart from confisca tion has this happened in one or more cases what were the results victims do victims of thb profit indirectly from financial investigations how how can financial investigations also benefit victims research method and the tools used the research was undertaken in three parts part study of literature and general orientation information on financial investigations and confiscation so far as relevant was studied for the current research. this included academic research policy reports and memoranda arti cles in newspapers and professional periodicals study materials for police courses in this area and informational material in print and on the internet. we also attended conferences and symposia and had discussions with experts in this field. part general characteristics of criminal investigations financial investigations questions were asked during the telephone interviews of the team leaders in the crimi nal investigations into thb successfully completed in as regards the extent of financial investigation that had been undertaken and any results it produced. if financial investigators had also been involved in the case we also tried to contact them if necessary to obtain in trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur formation. five cases that were interesting from the perspective of financial investigation were chosen for case studies. for these case studies the team leaders for the police investiga tions and the financial investigators were interviewed in greater depth and we also studied the files produced by the police. part confiscation the fourth nrm report presented the features of every successfully completed investiga tion into thb in . for nine of the cases the team leaders indicated at the time that a confiscation sanction had been or would be claimed. the present research enquired as to the results produced by this. the number of cases in which a confiscation sanction was actually claimed turned out to be significantly lower. the results of this part of the research accord ingly relate to four completed cases from rather than nine. one of these four was ex amined as a case study. the case description is based on information from an interview with the financial investigator concerned the police file on the case and research into the case car ried out by students at the police academy in the context of their training volmerink jager . two questionnaires were used in the research one for telephone interviews and one for the case studies. because of the exploratory nature of the research both of the questionnaires contained many open questions. incidental comments on the research collecting the information took longer than had been planned. the most important reasons for this were that the police appeared to have less time available for interviews than previ ously that information on financial investigations was not always readily available and the extra time needed to contact the financial investigators concerned. the information we asked for could not be obtained in some cases. the information was also sometimes difficult to interpret because tactical investigators were not always aware of the statutory basis for the financial investigation that had been carried out or what the results had been in financial terms. in addition many open questions were asked so that we cannot always say whether the results we obtained would apply to all of the investigated cases. finally we only studies successfully completed criminal investigations. it is possible that fi nancial investigation played a greater part in the successfully completed cases than in the cases that were necessarily discontinued. the public prosecution service data investigation introduction at the request of bnrm annual analyses are carried out on a thb sub file from the na tional public prosecution service database which includes information on the prosecution appendix of suspects drawn from the district court area prosecution offices. the analyses provide a picture of procedural progress at first instance. public prosecution service data includes in formation on cases and offences. a criminal case in the context of prosecution is a case against one accused. criminal cases against individual suspects may relate to more than one offence. aim and research questions the aim of the research was to provide an understanding of how suspects of thb are prose cuted in the netherlands. the research questions were how many cases relating to thb were registered with the public prosecution service in and how often did these involve underage victims how are the suspects classified as regards gender age and country of origin which offences apart from thb are they suspected of having committed how did the public prosecution service process the cases in and how did the courts dispose of the cases in and how often did the various parties intimate appeals against court verdicts what developments have occurred during the period in relation to thb research method we selected the cases from the entire public prosecution service database which involved at least the registration of an offence of thb. no specific cohorts of perpetrators or vic tims were followed in the analyses but we checked the data for each year to see how many cases were registered and how many were processed by the public prosecution service and disposed of by the court. additional comments the public prosecution service data only includes the main offence that is charged. also where the charge includes more than one main offence only the first offence is registered in the public prosecution service database. what this means is that some of the information reaching the public prosecution service and which might play a part during the course of the prosecution cannot be found within the public prosecution service data. the analyses are carried by siba statistical information provision and policy analysis of the scientific research documentation centre wodc . this means that we did not necessarily deal with the same cases. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur the bnrm research into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry working definition the working definition of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry as applied in this research is serious abuse in an employment situation with the victim being coerced to undertake work or services in a sector other than prostitution. exploitation brings human rights into play. research questions do the relevant players have concrete practical experience of the occurrence of exploita tion in sectors other than the sex industry in the netherlands if so which manifestations of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry are they aware of what are the economic sectors where exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry occurs who are the victims of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and what factors render people vulnerable to it who is guilty of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry and how do these peo ple operate to what extent can the situations described by the respondents be classified as exploita tion as defined in article f dutch criminal code research methods a study of literature including dutch policy documents and public and confidential gov ernment service documents studies of particular professions ethnic commercial enterprise and employment market fraud investigations into particular groups such as au pairs and people held in aliens detention and reports on topics associated with thb such as people smuggling. also literature concerning exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry in other countries reports covering the entire world or europe including those from the ilo as well as studies on the situation in germany belgium france and the united kingdom. enquiries. brief questionnaires were set out on a large scale. for this grapeshot method we opted to draw the research and with it the subject matter to the attention of as many or ganisations and individuals as possible who might be in contact with clients who were po tentially vulnerable to exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. the aim of the questionnaire was to form a picture of the symptoms of this type of exploitation that are so far as the respondents were aware since they had been approached on the basis of their possible contacts with victims of exploitation. appendix picked up on in practice and also to identify individuals to interview about actual cases. the enquiry consisted of open questions relating to the period from onwards. interviews. respondents who indicated they were aware of examples of abuse in employ ment situations and who were prepared to cooperate were interviewed either in person or by telephone. these semi structured interviews attempted to obtain case descriptions that were as full as possible. a direct approach was made to organisations and individuals where we assumed or knew in advance that they might know of examples of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry or have expertise in specific subject areas. one lawyer also made contact with bnrm on his own initiative in connection with a relevant case. study of completed investigation files. bnrm enquired as to whether the police investiga tions into thb for sexual exploitation which we were already aware of and which had been concluded during the period between and also contained indications of exploita tion in sectors other than the sex industry. five investigation files were studied as a result and these supplied two case descriptions. accompanying an employment market fraud team amf team . the health and safety in spectorate s amf teams check up on compliance with the aliens employment act. in order to obtain a picture of the practicalities of workplace checks and the operating methods of the amf teams we spent one day with a team carrying out checks in the construction agricul tural and horticultural sectors. response rate several factors contributed to the non response rate including the method of approach wide distribution of a brief questionnaire . many of the organisations and individuals who were approached were also surprised at the possible link between their practical experiences and thb. it is possible that some organisations who devote themselves to the interests of people without residence permits did not respond from fear that the results of the research might contribute towards what they would describe as the hunt for illegals. many of the professionals we approached also had a bond of trust with their clients and had to deal with professional confidentiality. this might have been the reason why some refused to provide any information even though this could be done anonymously and all of the information was dealt with in confidence. every questionnaire followed the same pattern. the layout or wording was adjusted to the specific target group where necessary. for instance respondents from the health and safety inspectorate were asked what they did if they came across possible exploitation during checks at workplaces and the questionnaire for lawyers explored any legal actions considered or undertaken following indications of an exploitative situation. with the exception of the hsi inspectors and siod investigators. the responses from lawyers indicated varying interpretations of professional confidentiality. according to the secretary of the netherlands bar association nederlandse orde van advocaten it is always a personal decision for the lawyer as to whether or not he invokes the right to professional confidentiality. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur incidental comments on the research the recent introduction of the new offence meant that there had scarcely been any investi gation or prosecution of exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry at the time when the research was carried out. this is one of the reasons why not much information was ob tained from the police. the expertise centre on human trafficking people smuggling emm did provide information at the start of on the number of ongoing criminal in vestigations into exploitation in sectors other than the sex industry. this operational infor mation is not discussed at this point. the input from trade unions and employer organisa tions was also limited although these are potentially important sources and players as re gards exploitation in these other sectors. the case study material is a collection of indications taken at a given moment in time. once the case details had been noted further developments in the case were not pursued. this means for example that we do not know whether certain exploitative situations are still go ing on or the results of actions such as official reports of thb and wage claims. the infor mation is also second hand. the perspectives of victims and perpetrators are lacking be cause there was no contact with victims and no field work where exploitation actually oc curs. appendix explanation of tables and statistics explanation of the tables this report contains several tables. the following comments are important for a proper un derstanding of the tables. when the table figures are added up they do not always reach . for ease of reading however is always used as the sum total in the tables. a dash in the tables indicates that the number is zero or that the appropriate percentage is . when the figure is more than zero but the percentage rounds out to then the dash is replaced by . explanation of the statistics used standard deviation this report sometimes states the average figure. the actual number and the standard devia tion are also indicated occasionally. the standard deviation indicates the extent of diver gence among the figures used to calculate the average the higher the standard deviation the greater the divergence. index figure some tables indicate an index figure. the index figure shows how far the number of sus pects for instance has changed in a particular year in relation to a base year. the year cho sen as the base year is stated in the table heading. this year is set at . an index figure greater than reflects an increase in relation to the base year and a figure below repre sents a decline. appendix supplementary tables table b . nationality of possible victims registered with the stv per annum nationality total n n n n n n afghan albanian algerian angolan antigua and barbadian armenian bangladeshi belarussian belgian beninese bosnian brazilian british bulgarian burundian cameroonian canadian chinese colombian congolese croatian cuban czech dominican dutch ecuadorian egyptian eritrean trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur nationality total n n n n n n estonian ethiopian french georgian german ghanaian greek of guinea bissau guinean guyanese hungarian indonesian iranian iraqi irish italian ivory coast kazakh kenyan kyrghiz latvian liberian lithuanian luxembourg macedonian malawian malaysian moroccan mexican moldavian mongolian namibian appendix nationality total n n n n n n nigerian north korean norwegian pakistani philippino polish portuguese romanian russian rwandan senegalese sierra leonse slovakian somalian sudanese surinamese swedish tajiki taiwanese thai togolese turkish ugandan ukrainian uzbekistan vietnamese former yugoslavian zimbabwean unknown total source stv files . the information in this table differs slightly from the figures presented in the stv s yearly reports on and . this is because bnrm worked with stv files in which the stv had made some additional corrections. trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur table b . nationality of persons with a b permit application nationality applications permits granted n n albanian armenian belarussian brazilian british bulgarian burundian cameroonian chinese czech dominican guinean hungarian iranian italian latvian moroccan nigerian nigerien norwegian polish romanian russian senegalese sierra leonese slovakian surinamese thai turkish ugandan ukrainian appendix uzbek vietnamese unknown total table b . countries of birth of suspects per year of registration country of birth total n n n n n n afghanistan albania angola belgium brazil bulgaria cameroon cape verde islands china colombia czech republic democratic republic congo former zaire egypt estonia france federal republic of germany ghana greece hungary indonesia iran iraq ireland korea kuwait latvia trafficking in human beings fifth report of the national rapporteur country of birth total n n n n n n lebanon liberia lithuania malaysia morocco netherlands netherlands antilles niger nigeria poland portugal romania sierra leone somalia soviet union sudan suriname syria thailand turkey uganda united kingdom united states of america vietnam former yugoslavia unknown total colofon reference dutch national rapporteur on thb . trafficking in human beings fifth report of the dutch national rapporteur. the hague bureau nrm. bureau of the dutch national rapporteur onthb p.o. box eh the hague the netherlands www.bnrm.nl tel fax production aolf legal publishers nijmegen tilburg layout jook van der snel bnrm ascii encodepages false allowtransparency false autopositionepsfiles true autorotatepages pagebypage binding left calgrayprofile dot gain calrgbprofile adobe rgb calcmykprofile euroscale coated v srgbprofile srgb iec . cannotembedfontpolicy warning compatibilitylevel . compressobjects off compresspages true convertimagestoindexed true passthroughjpegimages true createjdffile false createjobticket false defaultrenderingintent default detectblends true colorconversionstrategy usedeviceindependentcolor dothumbnails false embedallfonts true embedjoboptions true dscreportinglevel syntheticboldness . emitdscwarnings false endpage imagememory lockdistillerparams true maxsubsetpct optimize false opm parsedsccomments true parsedsccommentsfordocinfo true preservecopypage true preserveepsinfo true preservehalftoneinfo true preserveopicomments false preserveoverprintsettings true startpage subsetfonts true transferfunctioninfo apply ucrandbginfo preserve useprologue false colorsettingsfile europe prepress defaults alwaysembed true neverembed true antialiascolorimages false downsamplecolorimages false colorimagedownsampletype bicubic colorimageresolution colorimagedepth colorimagedownsamplethreshold . encodecolorimages false colorimagefilter dctencode autofiltercolorimages true colorimageautofilterstrategy jpeg coloracsimagedict qfactor . hsamples vsamples colorimagedict qfactor . hsamples vsamples jpeg coloracsimagedict tilewidth tileheight quality jpeg colorimagedict tilewidth tileheight quality antialiasgrayimages false downsamplegrayimages false grayimagedownsampletype bicubic grayimageresolution grayimagedepth grayimagedownsamplethreshold . encodegrayimages false grayimagefilter dctencode autofiltergrayimages true grayimageautofilterstrategy jpeg grayacsimagedict qfactor . hsamples vsamples grayimagedict qfactor . hsamples vsamples jpeg grayacsimagedict tilewidth tileheight quality jpeg grayimagedict tilewidth tileheight quality antialiasmonoimages true downsamplemonoimages false monoimagedownsampletype bicubic monoimageresolution monoimagedepth monoimagedownsamplethreshold . encodemonoimages true monoimagefilter ccittfaxencode monoimagedict k allowpsxobjects false pdfx acheck false pdfx check false pdfxcompliantpdfonly false pdfxnotrimboxerror true pdfxtrimboxtomediaboxoffset . . . . pdfxsetbleedboxtomediabox true pdfxbleedboxtotrimboxoffset . . . . pdfxoutputintentprofile none pdfxoutputcondition pdfxregistryname http www.color.org pdfxtrapped unknown description fra feff f f e d e e f d e f e e e f c f e e c e f e c e d f e d e c f e e c f c f f d e e f c f e e f c e e jpn feff e a d b a f ad e cf ea b cf b f f c b d b f f e e b cea b fdd c d e e a d b a f c f f f f a e ee d a d e deu feff e e e c c e e a d c c e f e d f b d e e d e f e c c f e c d e c c e a a c e e d f b d e b f e e e d f f d d e e f f e e e ptb feff c a f e e f f d e f f d d f c e e f d d f f d c d e f d c f e f f d e f f d f f d f f c e f e dan feff e c c e c f d f b d e d f a c c f c f e e f e b b c e d f b d e b e e e d f f e f e e nld feff b a e c c e e f d d f d e e d b e d e f c e f c f f e b b c e d f d e e b e e e f e f e d f e e e f e esp feff f f e f d e f f e d f f c f e d e d e c c c d d e c f f d e f e f e f e f e f f e suo feff e e e e c c f e c f d b a f a c a f e c f c f e b f b a b e b b e d b a f e f d a f e d f a c d c c d d c c f c c e ita feff d f a f e f d e f e e f c a f e d f e c e d d c f e f d e f f e f f e f e f e e nor feff b e e c c e e c e f d f b d e d f c f c f e e f b b c e d f b d e e b e e e d f f e f e e sve feff e e e e e e c c e e e e e c c b d f b d e d f c c f e e f e d e e b b c e d f b d e e b e f e d f f e c c e e enu feff e f f d e d f c f e f d f e e c e f d e e f e f e e e c e setdistillerparams hwresolution pagesize . . setpagedevice 