 no. in the supreme court of the united states doyle randall paroline petitioner vs. amy unknown and united states respondents. on writ of certiorari to the united states court of appeals for the fifth circuit brief amicus curiae of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children in support of respondent amy unknown w. warren h. binford counsel of record paul j. de muniz willamette university college of law child and family advocacy clinic winter street southeast salem oregon wbinford willamette.edu counsel for amicus curiae dated november cockle legal briefs www.cocklelegalbriefs.com i table of contents page interest of the amicus curiae ............... summary of the argument ........................ argument ........................................................... i. international law compels na tions to support the restoration of child pornography victims .... a. the united states treaty obligations compel reading the mandatory resti tution statute without a proximate cause requirement ................................ b. evolving international legal norms support restoration of child pornog raphy victims ........................................ ii. modern technologies add chal lenging complexities to the an cient crime of child sexual abuse ......................................................... a. the child pornography market in the digital age compels a comprehensive legal response by the united states .... b. child pornographers collectively con tinue the victimization of children globally and indefinitely ...................... ii table of contents continued page c. due to the international nature of child pornography in the twenty first cen tury imposing a proximate cause re quirement on the plain text of u.s.c. would impede the full restora tion of child pornography victims ....... d. dutch lawmakers are also formulat ing legal solutions to ensure compen sation to child pornography victims .... conclusion ....................................................... appendix relevant excerpts from international treaties ratified by the united states ............................... a relevant excerpts from international treaties signed but not ratified by the united states ..................................................................... a relevant excerpts from other international instruments ......................................................... a relevant excerpts from foreign laws .................. a iii table of authorities page cases medellin v. texas u.s. ...................... new york v. ferber u.s. ................... osborne v. ohio u.s. ............ roper v. simmons u.s. ..................... thompson v. oklahoma u.s. ........... whitney v. robertson u.s. ........... statutes u.s.c. .................................... u.s.c. ............................................. u.s.c. ....................................... passim u.s.c. ............................................... protection of children against sexual exploi tation act of pub. l. no. stat. ........................................................... violence against women act pub. l. no. stat. ...................................... foreign law hof amsterdam april ecli nl ghams bz neth. richard van o. neth. ........... hof s gravenhage juni ecli nl ghsgr br neth. ................................................ iv table of authorities continued page rb. zeeland west brabant juli ecli nl rbzwb neth. ............................... rb. zutphen november njfs ecli nl rbzut bk neth. ................. wetboek van strafrecht sr criminal code art. b neth. ...................................................... art. f neth. .................................................. treaties and other international instruments convention for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms opened for sig nature nov. c.e.t.s. no. .................... convention on cybercrime opened for signature nov. t.i.a.s. no. c.e.t.s. no. ........................................................... convention on the rights of the child opened for signature nov. u.n.t.s. ....... council of europe convention on the protec tion of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse opened for signature oct. c.e.t.s. no. lanzarote con vention .......................................................... declaration on the elimination of violence against women g.a. res. u.n. doc. a res dec. ................................. v table of authorities continued page declaration of the rights of the child g.a. res. xiv gaor th sess. supp. no. u.n. doc. a nov. ................ directive eu of the european parlia ment and of the council of april on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims and replacing council framework decision jha o.j. l ........................... directive eu of the european parlia ment and of the council of december on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornog raphy and replacing council framework de cision jha o.j. l ..... directive eu of the european parlia ment and of the council of october establishing minimum standards on the rights support and protections of victims of crime and replacing council framework decision jha o.j. l .... framework decision jha of march on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings o.j. l .............. framework decision jha o.j. l .................................................................... geneva declaration of the rights of the child sept. league of nations o.j. spec. supp. ....................................................... vi table of authorities continued page international covenant on civil and political rights opened for signature dec. u.n.t.s. ..................................................... international labour organization convention no. on the prohibition and immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour opened for signature june u.n.t.s. ...................... optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography opened for signature may t.i.a.s. no. u.n.t.s. ........................ passim universal declaration of human rights g.a. res. iii a u.n. doc. a res iii dec. ......................................................... vienna convention on the law of treaties art. opened for signature may u.n.t.s. ............................................................ other authorities yaman akdeniz internet child pornography and the law national and international re sponses .......................................................... cynthia price cohen role of the united states in drafting the convention on the rights of the child creating a new world for chil dren loy. poverty l.j. ............................. vii table of authorities continued page convention on the rights of the child ratifica tion status united nations treaty collection database .................................................................. council of europe explanatory report council of europe convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse ................................................ council of europe on observer status for the united states of america comm. of minis ters res. ................................................ jaap de hullu materieel strafrecht over algemene leerstukken van strafrechtelijke aansprakelijkheid naar nederlands recht th ed. neth. ........ terre des hommes fullscreen on view an ex ploratory study on the background and psy chosocial consequences of webcam child sex tourism in the philippines .......................... robert j. edelmann exposure to child abuse images as part of one s work possible psy chological implications j. forensic psy chiatry psychol. ................................. first world congress against commercial sex ual exploitation of children the stockholm declaration and agenda for action against commercial sexual exploitation of children ....................................................................... maria frankowska the vienna convention on the law of treaties before united states courts va. j. int l l. ........................ viii table of authorities continued page human rights watch q a the convention on the rights of the child nov. ................ internet watch foundation annual and char ity report ................................................ philip jenkins beyond tolerance child por nography on the internet ....................... christian laes children in ancient rome ................................................................. john lascaratos effie poulakou rebelakou child sexual abuse historical cases in the byzantine empire a.d. child abuse neglect ........................... more than children identified and rescued in worldwide police operation europol mar. .................................................................... vitit muntarbhorn general rapporteur s re port from second world congress against csec ............................................................ john e.b. myers a short history of child pro tection in america fam. l.q. ......... national rapporteur on trafficking in hu man beings first report of the dutch na tional rapporteur child pornography neth. ............................................................... passim office of the united nations high commis sioner for human rights legislative history of the convention on the rights of the child vol. u.n. doc. hr pub .................. ix table of authorities continued page optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography ratification status .................................................... suzanne ost child pornography and sexual grooming ...................................................... jean koh peters how children are heard in child protective proceedings in the united states and around the world in survey findings initial observations and areas for further study nev. l.j. .................... s. exec. rep. no. ............................. s. exec. rep. no. ......................... shared hope international et al. report from the u.s. mid term review on the commer cial sexual exploitation of children in amer ica ................................................................. special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography human rights council u.n. doc. a hrc july .................... u.n. commission on human rights question of a draft optional protocol to the conven tion on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child por nography as well as basic measures needed for their eradication report of the working group on its second session u.n. doc. e cn. mar. ............................. x table of authorities continued page u.n. committee on the rights of the child concluding observations united states of america u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa co june ........................................................ u.n. committee on the rights of the child concluding observations on the second peri odic report of the united states of america u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa co july ........................................................................ u.n. committee on the rights of the child list of issues concerning additional and updated information related to the consid eration of the second periodic report of the united states of america written replies of the united states of america u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa q add. dec. ....... u.n. committee on the rights of the child list of issues concerning additional and up dated information related to the second pe riodic report of the united states of america u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa q july ........................................................................ u.n. committee on the rights of the child lists of issues to be taken up in connection with the consideration of the initial report of the united states of america u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa q feb. .................... xi table of authorities continued page u.n. committee on the rights of the child united states response to lists of issues to be taken up in connection with consideration of the initial report of the united states of america u.n. doc. crc c oposc usa add. may ........................................................... u.s. dep t of justice the national strategy for child exploitation prevention and interdic tion ................................................... u.s. dep t of state initial report of the united states of america to the u.n. committee on the rights of the child concerning the op tional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography sept. ............................................... u.s. dep t of state periodic report of the united states of america and u.s. response to recommendations in committee conclud ing observations of june jan. .................................................................. u.s. sentencing comm n report to con gress federal child pornography offenses dec. ............................................. united nations children s fund the yokohama global commitment ..................................... geraldine van bueren the international law on the rights of the child ............................ xii table of authorities continued page julia von weiler et al. care and treatment of child victims of child pornographic exploi tation cpe in germany j. of sexual aggression ................................. brief amicus curiae of the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children in support of respondent amy unknown interest of the amicus curiae the dutch national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children national rapporteur is an independent official organ of the netherlands. the national rapporteur s on september counsel for respondent amy un known filed a consent to the filing of amicus curiae briefs in support of either or neither party. on september coun sel for respondent wright counsel for respondent united states and counsel for petitioner paroline filed consents to the filing of amicus curiae briefs in support of either or neither party. no counsel for a party authored this brief wholly or par tially nor made a monetary contribution intended to fund this brief s preparation or submission. no person other than amicus and her counsel made a monetary contribution to this brief s preparation or submission. the dutch government created the national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings and sexual violence against children in response to the hague declaration of adopted at a european union ministerial conference on combating hu man sex trafficking. the national rapporteur conducts research on human trafficking and the sexual abuse of children to fulfill the dutch government s international treaty obligations. see directive eu of the european parliament and the council of april on preventing and combating traffick ing in human beings and protecting its victims and replacing council framework decision jha art. o.j. l council of europe convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse art. b opened for signature oct. c.e.t.s. no. continued on following page primary purpose is to report on the nature and extent of human trafficking and sexual violence against children in the netherlands. both globalization and the advent of the internet have significantly en hanced the transnational nature of these crimes with the ease of exchanging abusive material over the internet this is particularly evident in the case of child pornography. the rapid globalization of the child pornography market has compelled nations to collaborate in order to combat the challenges of twenty first century child pornography. it is in the spirit of both the united states and the netherlands lanzarote convention directive eu of the euro pean parliament and of the council of december on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of chil dren and child pornography and replacing council framework decision jha o.j. l . as of november the national rapporteur is organized under a recently enacted dutch law that replaces a ministerial decree. the law maintains the national rapporteur as an independent official organ of the netherlands. the phrase child pornography is used in this brief inter changeably with child sexual abuse images. use of the latter phrase emerged to distinguish it from simulated child pornog raphy where no actual child is used in the production of the images. thus child sexual abuse images refers specifically to child pornography in which an actual child is abused to produce the images. this is the child pornography that the national rapporteur is referring to in this brief since a child is harmed in the production of the child sexual abuse images and then con tinues to be harmed when the images are distributed and con sumed. the term images is expansive and may include digital imagery photographs sketches cartoons movies sound record ings paintings or any other depiction of the sexual abuse of a child regardless of media. history of international cooperation with regard to child pornography its perpetrators and most im portantly its victims that the national rapporteur respectfully submits this brief in support of respond ent amy unknown. the special representative of the united nations secretary general on violence against children marta santos pais asked the national rapporteur to include the following statement from ms. santos pais in this brief the special representative of the secretary general on violence against children srsg has identified the opportunities and risks associated with children s access to and use of new information and communica tions technologies as a priority for her mandate. this work is guided by international human rights stan dards including the convention on the rights of the child and its optional protocol on the sale of chil dren child prostitution and child pornography which recognize children s right to protection from sexual abuse through representation or images in porno graphic performances or materials. child pornogra phy is a serious form of violence against children including during its production and dissemination and when it is subsequently viewed by potentially thousands of child sex abusers. at the dawn of the s the exchange of information through cyberspace was just beginning. as widespread online access be came commonplace child pornography made its way into the global and connected world on the screens of personal computers through mobile phones and social media. information is available more easily and may be spread more quickly potentially reaching out to millions in a fraction of a second and remaining acces sible for a lifetime with a serious impact on countless children. it is imperative that child victims of this form of sexual abuse are given the right to restitution continued on following page summary of the argument the united states treaty obligations compel reading u.s.c. without imposing a proxi mate cause requirement on a through e . specifi cally the united states is a party to the optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography. the optional protocol requires inter alia that state parties support the restoration of child pornography victims and provide them with ac cess to adequate procedures to seek . . . damages from those legally responsible. twice the united states has expressly identified u.s.c. in reports to the united nations as the law by which it complies with its treaty obligations to support victim recovery. in its most recent report on treaty compli ance the united states cites specifically to petitioner paroline s offense child pornography possession under u.s.c. and states that the offense gives rise to mandatory restitution for the full for this crime. this is important as a remedy for these children and as a deterrent to prevent future situa tions of child sex abuse of this kind. optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child por nography art. opened for signature may t.i.a.s. no. u.n.t.s. entered into force jan. united states ratified dec. optional protocol emphasis added . amount of the victim s losses. moreover because the united states cites no other legal process satisfying its article obligations to provide a recovery mecha nism for child pornography victims this court should not impose a level of causation that would render the statute functionally ineffective in the twenty first century. the court is encouraged to interpret u.s.c. with a respect for the evolving international legal norms that nations are collaboratively develop ing to protect children and combat a rapidly expand ing global child pornography market. the court should also be mindful of the united states active role in helping to develop these legal norms which include robust protections and support for victim care and restoration. finally the court should interpret u.s.c. with an accurate understanding of the challenges the international community faces both in eliminating the child pornography market and supporting the restoration of the children victim ized by the production distribution and possession of the images of their abuse. that understanding should compel the court to read the statute as simply as it is written providing full meaningful restoration to child pornography victims. u.s. dep t of state periodic report of the united states of america and u.s. response to recommendations in committee concluding observations of june para. jan. . argument i. international law compels nations to support the restoration of child pornography victims. a. the united states treaty obligations compel reading the mandatory resti tution statute without a proximate cause requirement. the united states treaty obligations must guide the court s interpretation of u.s.c. man datory restitution statute . the united states was an active participant in the drafting of the optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography and was one of the first nations to sign the netherlands also actively participated in the drafting of the optional protocol alongside the united states. u.n. com mission on human rights question of a draft optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of chil dren child prostitution and child pornography as well as basic measures needed for their eradication report of the working group on its second session u.n. doc. e cn. mar. . it is critical for the court to appreciate the significant role that the united states has assumed in helping set the standards of the evolving normative legal framework for child pornography crimes internationally including victim restora tion. the fact that the united states required no new legislation after it ratified the optional protocol evidences this fact. u.s. dep t of state initial report of the united states of america to the u.n. committee on the rights of the child concerning the optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography para. sept. initial report . the optional protocol and the federal statutory framework lined up precisely. id. the continued on following page it. the united states subsequently ratified the op tional protocol and became obligated as a state party to ensure that sexually exploited children including child pornography victims receive medical and psy chological services for their full reintegration into society. optional protocol supra note at art. optional protocol to the convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography ratification status http treaties.un.org pages viewdetails.aspx src treaty mtdsg n iv ii c chapter lang en last visited nov. same was true for international labour organization conven tion no. on the prohibition and immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour opened for signature june u.n.t.s. ilo convention no. s. exec. rep. no. at . the united states also participated in the drafting of the council of europe convention on cybercrime and once again treaty provisions resembled the united states legal framework with regard to child pornography crimes. convention on cybercrime opened for signature nov. t.i.a.s. no. c.e.t.s. no. s. exec. rep. no. at . section i.b infra describes all of these treaties in more detail. the united states was more active than any other government in the drafting of the conven tion on the rights of the child. human rights watch q a the convention on the rights of the child nov. office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights legislative history of the convention on the rights of the child vol. at iii u.n. doc. hr pub cynthia price cohen role of the united states in drafting the convention on the rights of the child creating a new world for children loy. poverty l.j. . the united states proposed text or amendments for thirty eight out of the convention s forty sub stantive articles including several regarding exploitation abuse and the rehabilitation and reintegration of victims. human rights watch supra. . the optional protocol additionally and expressly requires that parties ensure that all child victims have access to adequate procedures to seek . . . dam ages from those legally responsible. id. at art. emphasis added . those legally responsible include offenders found guilty of child pornography posses sion. id. at art. c . moreover the optional proto col requires that the united states and other state parties ensure that victims of child pornography have access to procedures that are adequate and non discriminatory. id. at art. emphasis added . from the beginning the united states has relied expressly and specifically on u.s.c. to fulfill its treaty obligations under article of the optional protocol. the united states first cited the mandatory restitution statute in in its initial report to the united nations committee on the rights of the child u.n. committee regarding the united states im plementation of the optional protocol domestically. initial report supra note at . the united states initial report explained that u.s.c. pro vides mandatory restitution for any offense involving the sexual exploitation of children. id. at para. . nowhere does the united states mention proximate cause in its report. in the united states submitted a periodic report on its compliance with the optional protocol and again expressly cited u.s.c. as providing mandatory restitution for child sexual exploitation and other abuse offenses including u.s.c. which was the child pornography offense to which the offender in this case randall paroline pled guilty. u.s. dep t of state supra note at para. . the united states expressly explained in its report that restitution is mandatory and for the full amount of the victim s losses . . . . id. the united states cited no other statutory remedy supporting the restoration of child pornography victims. id. after receiving the united states initial report on its compliance with the optional protocol the u.n. committee requested additional information including data for the years and regarding the number of child victims provided with recovery assistance as indicated in article para graphs and of the protocol. u.n. committee on the rights of the child lists of issues to be taken up in connection with the consideration of the initial report of the united states of america para. c u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa q feb. . the united states response did not indicate that a single victim had received compensation from an offender under the mandatory restitution statute or any other statute despite the fact that u.s.c. was the cornerstone of the united states statement of compliance with article paragraph . u.n. com mittee on the rights of the child united states response to lists of issues to be taken up in connec tion with consideration of the initial report of the united states of america u.n. doc. crc c oposc usa add. may . instead the united states indicated that some victims may be eligible for a variety of government programs such as medi caid temporary assistance for needy families tanf and job corp. id. in its concluding obser vations regarding the united states initial report the u.n. committee identified the united states as one of the world s largest producers distributors and consumers of child pornography and expressly en couraged the united states inter alia to i mprove enforcement of the existing legislative framework on child pornography. u.n. committee on the rights of the child concluding observations united states of america para. u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa co june emphasis added . in the u.n. committee again identified victim restoration including compensation to victims as an issue in response to the united states periodic report and requested additional information. u.n. committee on the rights of the child list of issues concerning additional and updated informa tion related to the second periodic report of the united states of america para. u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa q july . specifically the u.n. committee asked for an indication of the measures taken by the united states to ensure that victims are provided with appropriate assistance for their full social reintegration physical psychological and psychosocial recovery as well as compensation. id. in its response the united states again failed to identify even one specific measure that it is taking to ensure compensation to child pornography victims. u.n. committee on the rights of the child list of issues concerning additional and updated informa tion related to the consideration of the second peri odic report of the united states of america written replies of the united states of america u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa q add. dec. . thus in its concluding observations the u.n. committee expressed concern about the growing availability of child pornography online the use of ever younger children and the increase in the violence of images recorded as well as the fact that sexually exploited children in the united states still lack adequate . . . compensation. u.n. committee on the rights of the child concluding observations on the second peri odic report of the united states of america paras. u.n. doc. crc c opsc usa co july . adequate remedy and reparation should be sought legally and through other means according to the u.n. committee in addressing the united states treaty obligations under articles and of the op tional protocol. id. at para. . the optional protocol also requires that state par ties criminal justice systems make the best interest of the child a primary consideration in the treat ment of child victims. optional protocol supra note at art. . in interpreting u.s.c. this court should consider whether the united states treaty obligations under article of the optional protocol compel the court to consider the best inter est of the child in deciding whether to impose a proximate cause requirement on the plain language of the mandatory restitution statute. the court has held that a treaty is on the same footing and made of like obligation with an act of legislation. whitney v. robertson u.s. medellin v. texas u.s. . when a statute and a treaty conflict the court will give meaning to both if it can without violating the language of either. otherwise the latter in time controls. whitney u.s. at noting that if the treaty is later in time it must be self executing . while the optional protocol is not self executing it is the latter in time and by interpreting u.s.c. without imposing a proximate cause requirement on the statute the court can and should give effect to both the statute and the treaty without violating the language of either. b. evolving international legal norms support restoration of child pornog raphy victims. both the united states and the netherlands have been actively involved in developing an inter national normative legal framework that includes a significant and express focus on the protection of children from sexual exploitation and the restoration of child victims who are exploited. in interpreting the laws of the united states the court has turned to international law to assess the evolving standards of decency. thompson v. oklahoma u.s. . as the court interprets the mandatory resti tution statute it should consider the international norms that have been evolving during the last cen tury. in the league of nations adopted the first international instrument recognizing the inherent uniqueness of childhood and committing to provide children with special care and protection. geneva declaration of the rights of the child sept. league of nations o.j. spec. supp. at expressly stating that children should be protected from every form of exploitation . the united na tions declaration of the rights of the child followed twenty five years later and expanded on the original principles of the geneva declaration and incorporated references to the united nations charter and the universal declaration of human rights making clear that children are entitled to all human rights previously recognized as well as addi tional rights due to their special status as children. both the united states and the netherlands actively participated in the drafting of the declaration. geraldine van bueren the international law on the rights of the child . principle of the declaration states that children shall enjoy special protection and shall be given opportunities and facilities by law and by other means to enable them to develop physically men tally morally spiritually and socially in a healthy and declaration of the rights of the child g.a. res. xiv gaor th sess. supp. no. u.n. doc. a nov. asserting that mankind owes to the child the best it has to give and the child by reason of his physical and mental immaturity needs special safeguards and care including appro priate legal protection . . . . . universal declaration of human rights g.a. res. iii a u.n. doc. a res iii dec. recognizing childhood is entitled to special care and assistance . normal manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity. in the enactment of laws for this purpose the best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration. declaration of the rights of the child supra note at princ. . principle further provides that children shall be protected against all forms of neglect cruelty and exploitation. they shall not be the subject of traffic in any form. id. at princ. . it is important to note that these were unanimous values shared by the international community on the histor ical eve of the significant growth of the child pornog raphy market in the s and s. see infra section ii.a. at the end of the first wave of growth in the twentieth century child pornography market the in ternational community celebrated the world s chil dren with the international year of the child in which commenced the drafting process of the world s first binding children s rights treaty the united nations convention on the rights of the child. the drafting of the convention on the rights of the child involved more than seventy countries in cluding the united states and the netherlands and spanned ten years. office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights supra note . the convention on the rights of the child was introduced to the united nations general assembly in just four years after the first child pornogra phy network was identified on the internet. yaman akdeniz internet child pornography and the law national and international responses . the convention on the rights of the child was adopted unanimously by the general assembly and broke records for the greatest number of signatories to a treaty on the day it opened for signature. convention on the rights of the child opened for signature nov. u.n.t.s. jean koh peters how children are heard in child protective proceedings in the united states and around the world in survey findings initial observations and areas for further study nev. l.j. . today the convention on the rights of the child is the most widely ratified human rights treaty in the world and sets universal standards for the protection of chil dren for countries to strive towards and by which they agree to be measured. convention on the rights of the child ratification status united nations treaty collection database http treaties.un.org pages viewdetails.aspx src treaty mtdsg no iv chapter lang en last visited nov. . while the united states has not yet ratified the convention on the rights of the child it signed the convention on february following active participation in the drafting process. id. further this court has relied on the near universal ratifica tion of the convention on the rights of the child in gauging the weight of international opinion affirm ing the court s decision. see roper v. simmons u.s. finding unconstitutional the imposition of the death penalty for juvenile offend ers . the convention on the rights of the child re quires that countries take all appropriate measures to promote physical and psychological restoration and social reintegration of a child victim of exploitation abuse or any other form of cruel inhuman or de grading treatment. convention on the rights of the child supra at art. . while the united states has only signed the convention article of the vienna convention on the law of treaties requires a nation not to defeat the purpose of a treaty before ratifica tion. vienna convention on the law of treaties art. opened for signature may u.n.t.s. . other international treaties also evidence the rise of an international norm in the twentieth century recognizing that children have a right to special pro tections. international covenant on civil and politi cal rights art. opened for signature dec. u.n.t.s. united states ratified june noting a child s right to measures of protection from state society and the child s family . nations have gone further in developing international instruments that require state parties to provide assistance for victims physical and psychological restoration. declaration on similar to the convention on the rights of the child the united states has signed but not ratified the vienna convention on the law of treaties. however the united states state de partment has recognized many of its provisions as customary in ternational law. maria frankowska the vienna convention on the law of treaties before united states courts va. j. int l l. . the elimination of violence against women g.a. res. art. d g u.n. doc. a res dec. ilo convention no. supra note at art. b . in ratifying ilo convention no. the senate did not specifically reference u.s.c. but recognized that the united states already criminalized child pornography and that u.s. law is sufficient in order for the united states to comply with the convention. s. exec. rep. no. supra note at . together these instruments along with others convey an emerging international norm con demning child sexual abuse and child pornography and compelling state parties to develop laws to pro tect and care for children and support their restora tion when harmed. in recognizing the need to provide restoration services to child pornography victims the united states enacted the mandatory restitution statute as part of the violence against women act pub. l. no. stat. . fol lowing the enactment of the mandatory restitu tion statute the united states participated in three world congresses against commercial sexual exploi tation of children. the first world congress called on governments to provide recovery services to sex ually exploited children. first world congress against commercial sexual exploitation of children the stockholm declaration and agenda for action against commercial sexual exploitation of children . the second world congress recognized that the de velopment of technology created more difficulties for victims and called on countries to help victims re cover and reintegrate into society. vitit muntarbhorn general rapporteur s report from second world con gress against csec . at the conclusion of the second world congress the united states pointed to the optional protocol as providing a clear starting point for the international elimination of the sexual exploitation of children. united nations children s fund the yokohama global commitment . be tween the second and third world congresses the united states conducted a mid term review on the commercial sexual exploitation of children in america in collaboration with three non governmental agen cies. initial report supra note at para. . a report from the mid term review was submitted at the third world congress and found that the united states congress and executive branch had aggressively confirmed their commitment to combat the sexual ex ploitation of children through legislative measures in cluding the recognition and protection of victims rights. shared hope international et al. report from the u.s. mid term review on the commercial sexual exploi tation of children in america pmbl. add. iii at . the council of europe has also formed treaties to protect children from child sexual abuse. the united states actively participated in the drafting of the council of europe s convention on cybercrime which requires states to adopt legislative and other mea sures necessary to criminalize possession of child por nography on data storage media. s. exec. rep. no. supra note at convention on cybercrime supra note at art. . the united states ratified the treaty in with no need for implementing legislation because the united states had complied with the convention on cybercrime s provisions prior to the drafting of the convention. s. exec. rep. no. supra note at . four years later the lanzarote convention ex panded on the convention on cybercrime to require state parties to take all necessary measures to assist victims with their physical and psycho social restora tion and adopt a protective approach towards victims. lanzarote convention supra note at art. . although the united states has not ratified the lanzarote convention it participated in the drafting of the treaty and has been a permanent observer of the council of europe since . council of europe on observer status for the united states of america comm. of ministers res. council of europe explanatory report council of europe con vention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse para. . moreover the lanzarote convention is additional evi dence of emerging international legal norms focused on criminalizing modern child pornography and pro viding for the restoration of victims. the european union requires member states to punish the acquisition or possession of child pornog raphy and knowingly obtaining access including incitement or aiding and abetting. framework deci sion jha art. d o.j. l directive eu supra note at art. . significantly in accordance with the optional protocol the convention on the rights of the child and the lanzarote convention the new legislation will oblige member states to provide assistance sup port and protection to victims taking into account the best interests of the child. directive eu supra note at art. . among other things this includes ensuring that victims have access to free legal representation for the purpose of claiming com pensation. id. at art. . furthermore member states must ensure that victims receive assistance and support before during and after the criminal proceedings so that they may exercise their rights set out in framework decision jha. id. at art. . framework decision jha directs member states to ensure that victims of crime receive adequate protection acknowl edgement of their rights and special assistance. framework decision jha of march on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings o.j. l . the european union has recently expanded the rights support protection and compensation for victims of crime including an acknowledgement of directive eu by implementing directive eu which will replace directive jha in . directive eu of the european parliament and of the council of october establishing minimum standards on the rights support and protections of victims of crime and replacing coun cil framework decision jha o.j. l . it instructs member states to protect victims from continuing victimization and ensure that victims receive appropriate support to facilitate their recovery. id. at pmbl. para. . victim support services must provide at a minimum emotional and psychological support services. id. at art. . member states must ensure that victims also have the right to receive compensation from offenders through a judgment in criminal proceedings. id. at art. . member states are obliged to promote measures to encourage offenders to provide adequate compensa tion to victims. id. at art. . the new directive eu demonstrates the european union s evolv ing standards on crime victim standing and when read in conjunction with article of directive eu it furthers the aim to provide greater compen sation and support for victims of child pornography. in sum the united states and european nations including the netherlands have played an active role in developing an international legal framework that condemns child sexual abuse and the proliferation of child sexual abuse images. this framework also rec ognizes the harm done to victims and the need to provide for their restoration. under the optional protocol the united states has identified the manda tory restitution statute as its means of ensuring that child pornography victims have access to recovery from offenders. by not imposing proximate cause on subsections a e of u.s.c. the united states gives effect to the statute article of the optional protocol and the normative international legal framework that the united states has actively worked to create with other nations to combat child sexual abuse. ii. modern technologies add chal lenging complexities to the an cient crime of child sexual abuse. a. the child pornography market in the digital age compels a comprehensive legal response by the united states. in many countries including the united states the sexual abuse of children has been condemned for hundreds of years yet the invention of photography in added an element of complexity to this an cient crime. national rapporteur on trafficking in human beings first report of the dutch national rapporteur child pornography neth. see christian laes children in ancient rome see john e.b. myers a short history of child protec tion in america fam. l.q. see john lascaratos effie poulakou rebelakou child sexu al abuse historical cases in the byzantine empire a.d. child abuse neglect . for the first time a person could memorialize the sexual abuse of a child and use those images to continue to abuse the child. dnr supra at . the child sexual abuse images themselves became the currency in a market commonly referred to as child pornography in which the creation distribution and possession of child sexual abuse images perpetuate the sexual abuse of children and normalizes conduct that most civilizations have condemned. suzanne ost child pornography and sexual grooming laes supra at lascaratos supra. the technological limitations of cameras and the physical limitations on delivery methods such as postal services restricted the growth of the child por nography market for more than one hundred years. u.s. sentencing comm n report to congress federal child pornography offenses dec. dnr supra at . however with the introduction in the mid twentieth century of cameras that were af fordable and easier to use technological advances again contributed to a significant expansion of the child pornography market especially when coupled with a loosening in the s and s of social mores with regard to human sexuality. dnr supra at . because the significant expansion in the child pornography market during this period was evident in the united states and europe nations responded with tighter and more effective legal protections for children. in the united states congress criminalized child sexual abuse images in the late twentieth century in the s countries began to enact laws that tight ened prohibitions on child pornography which included banning the commercialization of child sexual abuse images. prior to tightening regulations child sexual abuse images were commer cially available alongside adult pornography in many countries. child pornography activities were made into criminal offenses in the netherlands in . dnr supra at . and this court upheld the rights of states to adopt legislation banning the production and distribution of child pornography. new york v. ferber u.s. protection of children against sexual exploi tation act of pub. l. no. stat. . in doing so the court recognized the continu ing harm inherent in child pornography. ferber u.s. at n. because the child s actions are reduced to a recording the pornography may haunt . . . the child in future years long after the original misdeed took place. . in osborne v. ohio the court later upheld the criminalization of possession of child sexual abuse images reiterating that continuing victimization is inherent to child pornography crimes. u.s. the pornography s contin ued existence causes the child victim s continuing harm by haunting the children in years to come. . four years after osborne the united states con gress enacted u.s.c. mandating that of fenders at all points in the child pornography market production distribution and possession pay full restitution to victims. mandatory restitution was part of a comprehensive federal statutory framework that also included clear definitions and criminalizing par ticipation at any stage of the child pornography market. u.s.c. . recently the united states congress responded to the increasingly global nature of child sexual crimes by enacting the prose cutorial remedies and other tools to end the exploi tation of children today act protect act which inter alia allows authorities in the united states to prosecute citizens of the united states when they sexually abuse children abroad. u.s.c. . similar to the protect act a plain reading of the mandatory restitution statute provides a more robust tool to protect children in light of rapidly changing technologies and the increasingly transna tional nature of child sexual abuse. the united states domestic and international efforts are appropriate because unfortunately the united states is the most common country of origin for child pornography victims. dnr supra at n. relying on images being compiled in interpol s international child sexual exploitation database . the united states also is the leading source country for perpetrators. id. at n. citing to an ecpat international report indicating that between and pedophiles participate in orga nized child pornography groups around the world and one third of those operate from the united states . the significant number of child sexual abuse images produced in the united states allows perpetrators in other countries to continue the victimization of american children by distributing or possessing their child sexual abuse images. see e.g. philip jenkins beyond tolerance child pornography on the internet noting the global community of child pornography collectors . similarly children of other countries including dutch children continue to be victimized in the united states by perpetrators who distribute or possess images of the child s abuse. id. see infra section ii.d. b. child pornographers collectively con tinue the victimization of children globally and indefinitely. the united states statutory framework attempts to respond to the rise of digital technologies and the widespread use of the internet in the late twenti eth century which together facilitated the explosive growth in the child pornography market that we con tinue to witness today. millions of individual users consume more than fifteen million child sexual abuse images in a market currently valued between three and twenty billion united states dollars annually. special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography report of the special rapporteur on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography paras. human rights council u.n. doc. a hrc july by najat m jid maalla united nations special rapporteur report . moreover with the rapid proliferation of internet usage the child pornography market is projected to continue growing exponen tially. the transformation from tangible to digital child sexual abuse images has had a debilitating effect on victims as well as the governments committed to between and the number of people with in ternet access has increased from million to . billion and continues to rise. robert j. edelmann exposure to child abuse images as part of one s work possible psychological implica tions j. forensic psychiatry psychol. . battling this crime. because images of the child s victimization are now digitalized it is virtually im possible to destroy them permanently. u.s. sentenc ing comm n supra at u.s. dep t of justice the national strategy for child exploitation prevention and interdiction dnr supra at . thus images of the child s sexual abuse exist indefinitely. moreover the internet compounds this challenge be cause child sexual abuse images can be easily dis tributed and consumed countless times around the world by millions of unidentified perpetrators. dnr supra at . today s child pornography victims exper ience continuing victimization by perpetrators who together perpetuate the distribution and possession of the victims sexual abuse images indefinitely. jenkins supra at . worse as the child pornography market grows exponentially and transnationally the majority of the perpetrators are never apprehended which makes the prosecution of perpetrators and the restoration of victims especially challenging. as child pornography victims grow older many come to realize that the images of their sexual abuse will continue to exist and be consumed for the re mainder of their lives and they are largely powerless many child pornography market participants engage in all three market stages creation distribution and possession but even those who only enter the market at one point collec tively participate in a market that at every stage victimizes some of the most vulnerable members of society and then per petuates that victimization indefinitely. see united nations spe cial rapporteur report supra at . to end the abuse. u.s. sentencing comm n supra at u.s. dep t of justice supra at dnr supra at . this knowledge may haunt the victims for years because possessors and distributors will continue to consume and possibly distribute the images and recordings. dnr supra at . a recent survey revealed that almost ninety five percent of victims suffer lifelong psychological damage and may never overcome the harm even after lifelong therapy. u.s. dep t of justice supra at d . the continued victimization can take an extreme physical psycho logical and financial toll on the victim and the vic tim s family. see u.s. sentencing comm n supra at julia von weiler et al. care and treatment of child victims of child pornographic exploitation cpe in germany j. of sexual aggression . victims of child pornography may have difficulty maintaining jobs and relationships because of the fear that people they interact with have viewed the abuse images and will recognize them. see u.s. sentencing comm n supra at . they also worry that perpetrators will use their abuse images for the purposes of grooming other children in order to fa cilitate subsequent sexual abuse sexual grooming child sexual abuse images are becoming more violent and graphic as perpetrators demand younger victims vaginal and anal penetration sometimes with sex toys and foreign objects rape bestiality defecation and urination bondage torture and other sadistic behavior. u.s. sentencing comm n supra at internet watch foundation annual and charity report . further expands the market and increases the num ber of victims. id. the psychological damage that child pornography victims suffer is experienced across cultures. for example german victims report feelings of shame hate disgust loathing fear repression guilt and speechlessness. von weiler supra at . victims in the united states have also reported feelings of depression anger withdrawal low self esteem and feelings of worthlessness. terre des hommes full screen on view an exploratory study on the back ground and psychosocial consequences of webcam child sex tourism in the philippines . the mere knowledge of the existence and circulation of the images of the victim s sexual abuse causes feel ings of shame humiliation and powerlessness. id. at . unfortunately these feelings do not dissipate over time but rather intensify to feelings of deep despair worthlessness and helplessness. id. a recent study of filipino children who were engaged by westerners to participate in live digital sexual abuse via the inter net webcam sex similarly demonstrated signifi cantly higher rates of post traumatic stress and feelings of low self esteem worthlessness shame guilt and being contaminated particularly after learning that the images of their sexual abuse may be available on the internet indefinitely. id. at . compounding the problems faced by victims of child pornography a recent survey among german victim assistance professionals found that profes sionals are ill equipped to deal with the type of psy chological damage suffered by child pornography victims thus it is difficult for victims to find effective therapeutic support. von weiler supra at . the professionals in the von weiler study indicated that working with victims of child pornographic exploita tion is more complex than working with child sexual abuse victims. id. at . the difference in the psychological harm suffered by child pornography victims compared to victims of other crimes is the permanent presence of the material on the internet. when the victim fully understands this reality feel ings of helplessness powerlessness shame and fear contribute to additional psychological stress. these victims thus have a higher susceptibility to post traumatic stress disorder depression and psychoses. id. at . two thirds of professionals working with child pornography victims reported that they themselves felt deep feelings of helplessness because the victim s sexual abuse images on the internet were permanent. id. at emphasis added . indeed one third of the professionals treating child pornography victims experienced thoughts such as in this situa tion healing becomes impossible. id. c. due to the international nature of child pornography in the twenty first century imposing a proximate cause requirement on the plain text of u.s.c. would impede the full res toration of child pornography victims. as discussed in more detail in section i supra the international community recognizes the rights of victims of child pornography to rehabilitation social reintegration and restoration whether through resti tution damages or some other method . however the increasingly transnational nature of child pornog raphy means that many perpetrators harm victims across national borders through the distribution or possession of the victim s child sexual abuse images digitally. a recent study by united states law en forcement agencies found that . million unique international ip addresses engaged in peer to peer file sharing of child pornography between october and october . u.s. dep t of justice supra at emphasis added . during that same period . million unique ip addresses in the united states engaged in peer to peer file sharing of child sexual abuse images. id. a report by the internet watch foundation in the united kingdom found that out of the reports of websites hosting child sexual abuse content outside of the united kingdom fifty four percent were hosted in north america thirty seven percent were hosted in europe and eight percent were hosted in asia. internet watch foundation supra note at . in a trans national investigation resulted in the shutdown of a child pornography network boylover.net which hosted members worldwide. the investigation was coordinated among thirteen different countries including the united states and the netherlands and resulted in the identification of suspects ar rests and the safeguarding of children. more than children identified and rescued in worldwide police operation europol mar. https www. europol.europa.eu content more children identified and rescued worldwide police operation. the transnational and digital nature of the child pornography market severely restricts the ability of victims to pursue restitution from most perpetrators. most countries do not have adequate child pornog raphy laws including the criminalization of child pornography. see dnr supra at . further the patchwork nature of child pornography laws across jurisdictions hampers both law enforcement and the ability of victims to pursue restoration. many perpe trators live thousands of miles away and are never apprehended let alone prosecuted. if a perpetrator were convicted the cost to the victim in pursuing restitution in a foreign jurisdiction would be consid erable making recovery both impractical and unlike ly. even when a perpetrator is convicted in the victim s own jurisdiction assuming there are legal protections a court cannot determine the specific restitution proximately caused by a single offender among an unknown number of offenders at a certain place and point in time when the harm continues indefinitely. imposing a proximate cause requirement on u.s.c. makes the mandatory restitution statute unworkable and thus ineffective for victim restoration. that is the fundamental problem that is solved by the fifth circuit s plain reading of u.s.c. . d. dutch lawmakers are also formulat ing legal solutions to ensure compen sation to child pornography victims. like the united states the netherlands is also trying to implement an effective legal scheme to ensure compensation to victims of child pornography. the central provision in the dutch criminal code on child pornography criminalizes an individual who distributes offers openly exhibits produces imports conveys exports acquires has possession of or know ingly gains access to child sexual abuse images. wetboek van strafrecht sr criminal code art. b neth. . the netherlands added knowingly gaining access to this list in response to the lanzarote convention which further defines the criminalized possession of pornography to include viewing of child sexual abuse images using recently developed tech nologies such as cloud storage that do not require the downloading of images. id. while dutch law does not provide the same kind of victim restoration as in u.s.c. sr art. f does mandate victim compensation for all criminal acts. sr art. f neth. . under this section offenders may be obliged to pay compensation to the state which transfers the sum without delay to the victim. sr art. f neth. . in addition this section connects compensation in criminal proceedings to the notion of liability in accordance with tort law. like dutch criminal law in general sr art. f incorporates a causality theory of reasonable attribution which is a comprehensive amalgamation of all older theories of causality that have proven inadequate under certain circumstances. jaap de hullu materieel strafrecht over algemene leerstukken van strafrechtelijke aansprakelijkheid naar nederlands recht th ed. neth. explaining why condition sine qua non and proxi mate cause do not suffice and how dutch criminal law has adopted the doctrine of reasonable attribution consistent with tort law principles . the fundamental question underlying causality examines when a court can reasonably attribute damage to the perpetra tor s conduct. this allows judges to weigh all the important circumstances in the case. the national rapporteur reads the mandatory restitution statute s general causation requirement as similar to the dutch theory of reasonable attribu tion both of which are less strict standards of causa tion than proximate cause. in the case of possession of child pornography the victim s harm can reasona bly be attributed to the perpetrator s consumption of child pornography as this continues the victimization indefinitely. dutch child pornography case law has been con tinuously evolving to affirm this causal connection where offenders are charged solely with possession. similar to this court s finding in osborne v. ohio dutch courts have held that offenders who collect child pornography participate in the sexual abuse of children. osborne u.s. at rb. zutphen november njfs ecli nl rbzut bk neth. . more recently a dutch court of appeals held that a perpetrator contributed to the perpetua tion of this very grave violation of the interests of minors. hof s gravenhage juni ecli nl ghsgr br neth. . the judgment continued it is common knowledge that thereby minors can incur heavy psychological and physical damage which can be detrimental to their further development. the accused should have realized that by his actions he made a considerable contribution to the conserva tion of this extremely harmful worldwide industry. id. dutch courts have begun to impose joint and sev eral liability principles on child pornography offend ers. in the united states authorities arrested an individual charged with possession of child sexual abuse images that originated from the netherlands. see also rb. zeeland west brabant juli ecli nl rbzwb neth. . the perpetrator was found guilty of child pornography and the court stated child pornography is highly undesirable in particular because its production involves sexual abuse and exploitation of children. the accused should be held partially responsible for that because by collecting child pornography he contributed to the conservation of the demand for this material. as long as there are consumers of child por nography people who produce and distribute it will continue to abuse children. to effectively combat child pornography it is therefore not only necessary to address the producers but def initely also to tackle the collectors. dutch law enforcement found the producer of the content and arrested him. the producer robert m. had worked in daycare centers for years where he had sexually abused children and recorded the abuses for distribution. robert m. s husband richard van o. was charged with possession. the court held both of fenders jointly and severally liable for damage caused to the victims through the possession of the images and ordered richard van o. to pay compensation to dozens of children depicted in the abuse materials. hof amsterdam april ecli nl ghams bz neth. richard van o. neth. . robert m. was solely liable to pay for the victims damages caused by the original physical sexual abuse that was recorded in the images. id. although the offenders had a close personal relationship the fact remains that richard van o. was found jointly and severally liable for post production damages to child pornogra phy victims based solely on possession of the images. id. the netherlands theory of causation and use of joint and several liability principles to multiple of fenders makes for an efficient system where victims have reduced burdens to facilitate recovery of the costs for their restoration. robert m. and richard van. o. s liability derived from a violation of article of the european convention on human rights the right to private life. convention for the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms art. opened for signature nov. c.e.t.s. no. . conclusion the united states treaty obligations and evolv ing international legal norms support providing mean ingful recovery to child pornography victims through the mandatory restitution statute to support their restoration. imposing proximate cause on the plain language of subsections a e would eviscerate the ability of child pornography victims to obtain ade quate restitution for their losses from perpetrators who collectively perpetuate their victimization indef initely through the production distribution and pos session of child sexual abuse images all around the globe. this court should interpret the mandatory restitution statute so that the statute provides full meaningful restoration to child pornography victims. for these reasons the dutch national rapporteur supports affirming the decision of the fifth circuit in all respects. respectfully submitted w. warren h. binford counsel of record paul j. de muniz willamette university college of law child and family advocacy clinic winter street southeast salem oregon wbinford willamette.edu counsel for amicus curiae i appendix table of contents page i. excerpts from international treaties rati fied by the united states ............................. a a. the optional protocol to the united nations convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornog raphy ...................................................... a b. the council of europe convention on cybercrime ............................................. a c. the international labour organiza tion convention no. on the prohi bition and immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour .......................................... a d. the united nations international cov enant on civil and political rights ....... a ii. relevant excerpts from international trea ties signed but not ratified by the united states ............................................................ a a. the united nations convention on the rights of the child ................................ a b. the united nations international cov enant on economic social and cultural rights ..................................................... a iii. relevant excerpts from other international instruments ................................................. a ii appendix table of contents continued page a. the council of europe convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention ......................... a b. the united nations declaration on the elimination of violence against women ................................................... a c. the united nations declaration of the rights of the child ...................... a d. the united nations universal decla ration of human rights ........................ a e. the league of nations geneva dec laration of the rights of the child ........ a iv. relevant excerpts from foreign law ......... a a. european union law ............................ a i. european union directive eu on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography and replac ing council framework decision jha ..................................... a ii. european union directive eu establishing minimum standards on the rights support and protection of victims of crime and replacing council framework decision jha ............................................ a b. the dutch criminal code ..................... a a relevant excerpts from international treaties ratified by the united states the optional protocol to the united nations convention on the rights of the child on the sale of children child prostitution and child pornography provision excerpts from the optional protocol preamble para. concerned about the growing availability of child pornography on the internet and other evolving technologies . . . . article state parties shall prohibit . . . child pornography . . . . article c child pornography means any representation by whatever means of a child engaged in real or simulated explicit sexual activities or any representation of the sexual parts of a child for primarily sexual purposes. article each state party shall ensure that as a minimum the following acts and activities are fully covered under its criminal or penal law whether these offences are committed domestically or transnationally or on an individual or organized basis c producing distributing dis seminating importing ex porting offering selling or possessing for the above pur poses child pornography as defined in article . a article each state party shall make these offences punishable by appropriate penalties that take into account their grave nature. article subject to the provisions of its national law each state party shall take measures where appropriate to establish the liability of legal persons for offences established in paragraph of the present article. subject to the legal principles of the state party this liability of legal persons may be criminal civil or administrative. article states parties shall adopt appropriate measures to protect the rights and interests of child victims of the practices prohibited under the present protocol at all stages of the criminal justice process in particular by a recognizing the vulnerability of child victims and adapting procedures to recognize their special needs . . . d providing appropriate support services to child victims throughout the legal process e protecting as appropriate the privacy and identity of child victims and taking measures in accordance with national law to avoid the inappropriate dissemination of information that could a lead to the identification of child victims g avoiding unnecessary delay in the disposition of cases and the execution of orders or decrees granting compensation to child victims. article states parties shall ensure that in the treatment by the criminal justice system of children who are victims of the offences described in the present protocol the best interest of the child shall be a primary consideration. article states parties shall take all feasible measures with the aim of ensuring all appropriate assistance to victims of such offences including their full social reintegration and their full physical and psychological recovery. article states parties shall ensure that all child victims of the offences described in the present protocol have access to adequate procedures to seek without discrimination compensation for damages from those legally responsible. article states parties shall take all necessary steps to strengthen international cooperation by multilateral regional and bilateral arrangements for the prevention detection investigation prosecution and punishment of those responsible for acts involving . . . child pornography . . . . a the council of europe convention on cybercrime provision excerpts from the convention on cybercrime article each party shall adopt such legislative and other measures as may be necessary to establish as criminal offences under its domestic law when committed intentionally and without right the following conduct a producing child pornography for the purpose of its distribution through a computer system b offering or making available child pornography through a computer system c distributing or transmitting child pornography through a computer system d procuring child pornography through a computer system for oneself or for another person e possessing child pornography in a computer system or on a computer data storage medium. a the international labour organization convention no. on the prohibition and immediate action for the elimination of the worst forms of child labour provision excerpts from ilo convention no. article t he term the worst forms of child labour comprises b the use procuring or offering of a child for . . . the production of pornography . . . article each member shall . . . take effective and time bound measures to c provide the necessary and appropriate direct assistance for the removal of children from the worst forms of child labour and for their rehabilitation and social integration article members shall take appropriate steps to assist one another . . . through enhanced international cooperation and or assistance . . . . a the united nations international covenant on civil and political rights provision excerpts from the international covenant on civil and political rights article every child shall have without any discrimination as to race colour sex language religion national or social origin property or birth the right to such measures of protection as are required by his status as a minor on the part of his family society and the state. a relevant excerpts from international treaties signed but not ratified by the united states the united nations convention on the rights of the child provision excerpts from the convention on the rights of the child preamble para. considering that the child should be fully prepared to live an individual life in society and brought up in the spirit of . . . peace dignity tolerance free dom equality and solidarity . . . . article in all actions concerning children . . . in courts of law . . . the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration. article states parties undertake to ensure the child such protection and care as is necessary for his or her well being . . . . article states parties shall ensure to the maximum extent possible the survival and development of the child. article no child shall be subjected to . . . unlawful interference with his or her privacy . . . nor to unlawful attacks on his or her honour and reputation. article the child has the right to the protection of the law against such interference or attacks. a article states parties shall take all appropriate legislative administrative social and education measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence injury or abuse neglect or negligent treatment maltreatment or exploitation including sexual abuse . . . . article such protective measures should as appropriate include effective procedures for the establishment of social programmes to provide necessary support for the child and for those who have the care of the child as well as for other forms of prevention and for identification reporting referral investigation treatment and follow up of instances of child maltreatment described heretofore and as appropriate for judicial involvement. article states parties recognize the right of the child to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health and to facilities for the treatment of illness and rehabilitation of health. article states parties recognize the right of every child to a standard of living adequate for the child s physical mental spiritual moral and social development. a article states parties undertake to protect the child from all forms of sexual exploitation and sexual abuse. for these purposes states parties shall in particular take all appropriate national bilateral and multilateral measures to prevent a the inducement or coercion of a child to engage in any unlawful sexual activity b the exploitative use of children in prostitution or other unlawful sexual practices c the exploitative use of children in pornographic performance and materials. article states parties shall take all appropriate measures to promote physical and psychological recovery and social reintegration of a child victim of any form of neglect exploitation or abuse torture or any other form of cruel inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or armed conflicts. such recovery and reintegration shall take place in an environment which fosters the health self respect and dignity of the child. a the united nations international covenant on economic social and cultural rights provision excerpts from the international covenant on economic social and cultural rights article the states parties to the present covenant recognize that special measures of protection and assistance should be taken on be half of all children and young per sons without any discrimination for reasons of parentage or other con ditions. children and young per sons should be protected from economic and social exploitation. their employment in work harmful to their morals or health or dan gerous to life or likely to hamper their normal development should be punishable by law . . . . article the steps to be taken by the states parties to the present covenant . . . shall include those necessary for a t he healthy development of the child b the creation of conditions which would assure to all medical service and medical attention . . . . a relevant excerpts from other international instruments the council of europe convention on the protection of children against sexual exploitation and sexual abuse lanzarote convention provision excerpts from the lanzarote convention article each party shall establish effective social programmes and set up multidisciplinary structures to provide the necessary support for victims their close relatives and for any person who is responsible for their care. article each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to assist victims in the short and long term in their physical and psycho social recovery. measures taken pursuant to this paragraph shall take due account of the child s views needs and concerns. article each party shall take measures under the conditions provided for by its internal law to co operate with non governmental organisations other relevant organisations or other elements of civil society engaged in assistance to victims. a article each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the following intentional conduct when committed without right is criminalised a producing child pornography b offering or making available child pornography c distributing or transmitting child pornography d procuring child pornography for oneself or for another person e possessing child pornography f knowingly obtaining access through information and communication technologies to child pornography. article each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to establish as criminal offences when committed intentionally aiding or abetting the commission of any of the offences established in accordance with this convention. article each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to establish as criminal offences when committed intentionally attempts to commit the offences established in accordance with this convention. a article each party may reserve the right not to apply in whole or in part paragraph to offences established in accordance with article paragraph .b d e and f article paragraph .c article and article . article each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the offences established in accordance with this convention are punishable by effective proportionate and dissuasive sanctions taking into account their seriousness. these sanctions shall include penalties involving deprivation of liberty which can give rise to extradition. article each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that the following circumstances . . . may . . . be taken into consideration as aggravating circumstances in the determination of the sanctions in relation to the offences established in accordance with this convention a the offence seriously damaged the physical or mental health of the victim b the offence was preceded or accompanied by acts of torture or serious violence c the offence was committed against a particularly vulnerable victim a article each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to ensure that investigations and criminal proceedings are carried out in the best interests and respecting the rights of the child. article each party shall adopt a protective approach towards victims ensuring that the investigations and criminal proceedings do not aggravate the trauma experienced by the child and that the criminal justice response is followed by assistance where appropriate. article each party shall take the necessary legislative or other measures to protect the rights and interests of victims . . . by g providing for their safety . . . from intimidation retaliation and repeat victimization article the parties shall co operate with each other in accordance with the provisions of this convention and through the application of relevant applicable international and regional instruments arrangements agreed on the basis of uniform or reciprocal legislation and internal laws to the widest extent possible for the purpose of a preventing and combating sexual exploitation and sexual abuse of children a b protecting and providing assistance to victims c investigations or proceedings concerning the offences established in accordance with this convention. the united nations declaration on the elimination of violence against women provision excerpts from the declaration on the elimination of violence against women article violence against women shall be understood to encompass but not be limited to the following a physical sexual and psycho logical violence occurring in the family including batter ing sexual abuse of female children in the household dowry related violence mari tal rape female genital muti lation and other traditional practices harmful to women non spousal violence and vio lence related to exploitation b physical sexual and psycho logical violence occurring within the general commun ity including rape sexual abuse sexual harassment and intimidation at work in a educational institutions and elsewhere trafficking in women and forced prostitution c physical sexual and psycho logical violence perpetrated or condoned by the state wherever it occurs. article states should condemn violence against women and should not invoke any custom tradition or religious consideration to avoid their obligations with respect to its elimination. states should pursue by all appropriate means and without delay a policy of eliminating violence against women and to this end should d develop penal civil labour and administrative sanctions in domestic legislation to punish and redress the wrongs caused to women who are subjected to violence women who are subjected to violence should be provided with access to the mechanisms of justice and as provided for by national legislation to just and effective remedies for the harm that they have suffered g work to ensure to the maxi mum extent feasible in the light of their available re sources and where needed a within the framework of international cooperation that women subjected to vio lence and where appropriate their children have special ized assistance such as reha bilitation assistance in child care and maintenance treat ment counselling and health and social services facilities and programmes as well as support structures and should take all other appro priate measures to promote their safety and physical and psychological rehabilitation. the united nations declaration on the rights of the child provision excerpts from the declaration on the rights of the child preamble whereas the peoples of the united nations have in the charter reaffirmed their faith in fundamental human rights and in the dignity and worth of the human person and have determined to promote social progress and better standards of life in larger freedom whereas the united nations has in the universal declaration of human rights proclaimed that everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set forth therein without distinction of any kind such as a race colour sex language religion political or other opinion national or social origin property birth or other status whereas the child by reason of his physical and mental immaturity needs special safeguards and care including appropriate legal protection before as well as after birth whereas the need for such special safeguards has been stated in the geneva declaration of the rights of the child of and recognized in the universal declaration of human rights and in the statutes of specialized agencies and international organizations concerned with the welfare of children whereas mankind owes to the child the best it has to give . . . . principle the child shall enjoy special protection and shall be given opportunities and facilities by law and by other means to enable him to develop physically mentally morally spiritually and socially in a healthy and normal manner and in conditions of freedom and dignity. in the enactment of laws for this purpose the best interests of the child shall be the paramount consideration. principle the child shall be protected against all forms of neglect cruelty and exploitation. he shall not be the subject of traffic in any form. the child shall not be admitted to employment before an appropriate a minimum age he shall in no case be caused or permitted to engage in any occupation or employment which would prejudice his health or education or interfere with his physical mental or moral development. the united nations universal declaration of human rights provision excerpts from the universal declaration of human rights article everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well being of himself and of his family including food clothing housing and medical care and necessary social services and the right to security in the event of unemployment sickness disability widowhood old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control. article motherhood and childhood are entitled to special care and assistance . . . . a the league of nations geneva declaration of the rights of the child provision excerpts from the geneva declaration of the rights of the child by the present declaration of the rights of the child . . . men and women of all nations recognizing that mankind owes to the child the best that it has to give declare and accept it as their duty that beyond and above all considerations of race nationality or creed a the child must be given the means requisite for its normal development both materially and spiritually b the child that is hungry must be fed the child that is sick must be nursed the child that is backward must be helped the delinquent child must be reclaimed and the orphan and the waif must be sheltered and succored c the child must be the first to receive relief in times of distress d the child must be put in a position to earn a livelihood a and must be protected against every form of exploitation a relevant excerpts from foreign laws european union directive eu on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography and replacing council framework decision jha provision excerpts from directive eu preamble the use of seized and confiscated instrumentalities and the proceeds from the offences referred to in this directive to support victims assistance and protection should be encouraged. preamble member states should consider giving short and long term assistance to child victims. any harm caused by the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of a child is significant and should be addressed. because of the nature of the harm caused by sexual abuse and sexual exploitation such assistance should continue for as long as necessary for the child s physical and psychological recovery and may last into adulthood if necessary. preamble framework decision jha establishes a set of victims rights in criminal proceedings including the right to protection and compensation. in addition child victims of sexual abuse sexual exploitation and child pornography should be given access to a legal counselling and in accordance with the role of victims in the relevant justice systems to legal representation including for the purpose of claiming compensation. article child victims of the offences referred to in articles to shall be provided assistance support and protection in accordance with articles and taking into account the best interests of the child. article member states shall take the necessary measures to ensure that a child is provided with assistance and support as soon as the competent authorities have a reasonable grounds indication for believing that a child might have been subject to any of the offences referred to in articles to . article member states shall ensure that where the age of a person subject to any of the offences referred to in articles to is uncertain and there are reasons to believe that the person is a child that person is presumed to be a child in order to receive immediate access to assistance support and protection in accordance with articles and . article member states shall take the necessary measures to ensure that assistance and support are provided to victims before during and for an appropriate period of time after the conclusion of a criminal proceedings in order to enable them to exercise the rights set out in framework decision jha and in this directive. member states shall in particular take the necessary steps to ensure protection for children who report cases of abuse within their family. european union directive eu establishing minimum standards on the rights support and protection of victims of crime and replacing council framework decision jha provision excerpts from directive eu preamble the resolution of the european parliament of november on the elimination of violence against women called on the member states to improve their national laws and policies to combat all forms of violence against women and to act in order to tackle the causes of violence against women not least by employing preventative measures and called on the union to guarantee the right to assistance and support for all victims of violence. preamble the member state of the victim s residence should provide assistance support and protection required for the victim s need to recover. a article member states shall ensure that victims in accordance with their needs have access to confidential victim support services free of charge acting in the interests of the victims before during and for an appropriate time after criminal proceedings. article victim support services as referred to in article shall as a minimum provide a information advice and support relevant to the rights of victims including on accessing national compensation schemes for criminal injuries and on their role in criminal proceedings including preparation for attendance at the trial b information about or direct referral to any relevant specialist support services in place c emotional and where available psychological support d advice relating to financial and practical issues arising from the crime e unless otherwise provided by other public or private services advice relating to a the risk and prevention of secondary and repeat victimisation of intimidation and of retaliation. article member states shall ensure that in the course of criminal proceedings victims are entitled to obtain a decision on compensation by the offender within a reasonable time except where national law provides for such a decision to be made in other legal proceedings. article member states shall promote measures to encourage offenders to provide adequate compensation to victims. the dutch criminal code provision excerpts from the dutch criminal code article f by court ruling whereby a person is convicted for a criminal offence that person may be obliged to pay the state a sum of money for the benefit of the victim. the state shall pay the amount received to the victim immediately. article f the court may impose an order if and insofar as under civil law the suspect is liable towards the victim for the damage caused by the criminal offence. a article f the order may be imposed together with punishments and other orders. article f sections a and b subsection one to and including four are applicable mutatis mutandis on the understanding that the increase of the amount due by virtue of the order shall be paid into the public funds of the state. article f payment by the convicted person to the state shall in the first place go towards the payment of the order and subsequently for the increases pursuant to subsection four. article f sections c and l subsection two to and including six are applicable mutatis mutandis on the understanding that the application of default detention or default juvenile detention does not take away the obligation pursuant to the order to pay damages to the victim. . article b . a term of imprisonment of not more than four years or a fine of the fifth category shall be imposed on any person who disseminates offers publicly displays manufactures imports forwards exports acquires or possesses an image or a data carrier containing an image of a sexual act in which a person who has apparently not yet attained the age of eighteen is involved or appears to be involved or who gains access to such an image by means of a computerized a device or system or through a communication service. . a term of imprisonment of not more than eight years or a fine of the fifth category shall be imposed on any person who commits any of the offences described in section by profession or custom. 