 european sexual exploitation offenders come from central and eastern europe are older than those involved in domestic small scale sexual exploitation are also sometimes female victims are from central and eastern europe or offenders and or victims in each human trafficking situation sometimes involves a situation in which the offender feigns a loving relationship with the victim sexual exploitation exploitation outside the sex industry gender almost always female roughly half are female age the vast majority are below the age of roughly half are below the age of region of origin frequently from africa and the netherlands frequently from the member states that joined the eu in or and asia reporting of offences reported the offence reported the offence underexposure of underage victims in of all reported victims were underage victims. there are indications that the proportion of underage victims is far larger because some agencies do not report underage victims and because at present only the victim s age at the time of notification is registered rather than the age at the time he or she first became a victim. of the underage victims that are currently reported have dutch nationality. more than a quarter are nationals of an african country. victims the characteristics of victims of sexual and of other forms of exploitation differ in a number of im portant respects. victims of sexual exploitation are more often female are younger and are more often from africa and the netherlands and less often from central and eastern europe. victims of sexual exploitation are also more willing to report the offence than victims of other forms of exploitation. non dutch victims in the b regulation because the b regulation involves cooperation with the police it is an important instrument in investiga tions. for victims it provides regular residence sta tus and access to facilities such as shelter . b permits granted in a b residence permit is occasionally not granted because of a victim s criminal antecedents for ex ample a record for shoplifting. however a b resi dence permit should be granted to every victim re gardless of criminal antecedents. increase in registered victims from in to in this does not necessarily mean that there was an actual increase in the number of victims. more likely the identification registration of victims has improved offenders prosecutions a year of suspects are charged with human traf ficking the cases against the remainder are of ten dismissed because of a lack of evidence for example . more than half of those who come before the courts are convicted of human trafficking. in most cases they are given an unconditional prison sentence the length of which almost never exceeds four years in only . who are the suspects usually male more than average age approximately occasionally minors or over the age of top countries of birth the netherlands bulgaria hungary turkey romania morocco surinam and the former netherlands antilles jointly accounting for of all suspects in . on average more than a third of the suspects are born in the netherlands. the proportion born in the three central and eastern european countries almost doubled between and from to . the opposite applies for the group of countries comprising turkey morocco surinam and the former neth erlands antilles the proportion of suspects born in these countries fell by half from to in that period. far more suspects in this latter category live in the netherlands than in their own country of birth. the suspects born in the netherlands are younger are not older than than suspects in the other two categories are not older than . different roles offenders in cases of sexual exploitation often perform a number of different roles in the human trafficking process. they can be recruiters transporters who bring victims across a border pimps bodyguards who control victims operators of sex businesses and drivers who bring the victims to their place of work . the role of pimp is performed least often by females and pimps have criminal antecedents more often than other offenders. bodyguards are younger than other offenders which could imply that the tasks associated with the role of bodyguard are delegated mainly to novice human traffickers . in contrast operators of sex businesses are the oldest group of offenders which might imply that the role of operator of a sex business is reserved mainly for the more experienced human traffickers . domestic small scale sexual exploitation offenders come mainly from the netherlands turkey morocco surinam or the former netherlands antilles are the youngest are almost always male. victims are from the netherlands or offenders and victims in each human trafficking situation regularly involves a situation in which the offender feigns a loving relationship with the victim three suspects born in bulgaria exploit three victims in the licensed and unlicensed prostitution sector window prostitution brothels sex clubs and escort agencies . they move the victims around in the netherlands and between the netherlands germany and switzerland. the suspects are a man aged recruiter and pimp a woman aged recruiter and pimp and a man aged pimp . the victims are a girl from bulgaria aged a woman from bulgaria aged and a woman from hungary aged . one of the victims is in a loving relationship feigned by one of the suspects. the victims passports and the money they earn are confiscated by the suspects and they and their families are subjected to threats or actual violence including sexual violence. international large scale exploitation outside the sex industry offenders come from asia and the netherlands are the oldest are also frequently female victims come from asia a large number of offenders around and victims ranging from to in each human trafficking situation never involves a feigned loving relationship between offenders and victims the parents of a year old dutch woman go to the police. their daughter is living with her boyfriend a dutch man aged around originally from morocco with criminal antecedents. the man has persuaded their daughter wo work as a prostitute in order to pay off a debt he has incurred. he earns some undeclared income as a painter and acts as her pimp when she works for him in a licensed sex club. more than ten indonesians who were recruited in their home country on the basis of false promises and who are in the netherlands illegally are encountered living in a pest ridden house that is also a fire hazard. in this house under appal ling conditions they prepare indonesian food products such as prawn crackers . four men from indonesia aged between and report the crime. there are six suspects who have been engaged in people smuggling and money laundering in addition to human trafficking. they are a dutch man aged receiving benefits his partner a dutch woman aged who has her own business his mistress an indonesian woman aged who works in the home care sector and who arranged the victims journey to the netherlands his daughter a dutch woman aged who has an administrative job and who provided accommoda tion for the victims his son in law a dutch man aged from surinam who is a civil servant and who also provided accommodation for the victims and an indonesian man aged who is the principal suspect s foreman. human trafficking is a serious frequently transnational problem that is often hidden but effective policies cannot be implemented in the dark. to address the problem of human trafficking we have to turn on the light where does it occur how large is the problem what form does it take my key message is therefore to tackle human trafficking effectively it must be made visible. human trafficking that is hidden must be revealed and once revealed it must be better registered. in that way we can shed a little more light on the hidden face of human trafficking. corinne dettmeijer vermeulen types of human trafficking structures source chapter investigation of suspects in the netherlands bnrm police investigation study profiles of victims source chapter registered victims in the netherlands comensha source chapter victims and the b regulation in the netherlands ind top eight countries of birth of suspects source chapter investigation of suspects in the netherlands bnrm police investigations study source chapter prosecution and trial of suspects in the netherlands pps data a noteworthy point is the small number of suspects born in africa apart from morocco that appear in the data on prosecutions. this is surprising because offenders and victims often come from the same region and africa is the largest region of origin of registered victims of sexual exploitation. trafficking in human beings visible and invisible turkey morocco surinam netherlands antilles bulgaria hungary romania netherlands year 